This is Jockel Podcast number 293 with echo Charles and me, Jockel Willink. Good evening,
I'm good evening. Hicks and Gracie approached me and asked me if I wanted to train with him.
Yes, sir. At that time I was a blue belt in Gjitsu, a lean 225 pounds. I worked out every day
and had been training Gjitsu hard for about two years. I had competed at the blue belt level
and won many competitions. I trained daily in San Diego with Dean Lister, a future world champion,
and with many other highly skilled Gjitsu practitioners. I was focused and motivated and determined.
But none of those things mattered. Hicks and who was 40 pounds lighter than me made me feel like a child.
He effortlessly controlled my movement, isolated my limbs and submitted me over and over again.
I fought hard, applied technique, after technique made adjustments, tried to surprise him, used all the strength and trickery and skill and effort I could master.
My resistance was futile. There was nothing I could do. Nothing.
When he was bored with my pitiful attempts at survival, we stopped sparring and talked for a bit.
He asked me about seal training. He related to the warrior culture of my occupation.
He also gave me an assessment of my Gjitsu quote. You do a good job staying calm and bad positions.
That is an important thing and quote. Soon the class was over. We shook hands and I thanked Hicks and for his time and for his knowledge.
And over the next few days I thought about what he had told me.
You do a good job staying calm and bad positions. That is an important thing.
I realized that this did not only apply to Gjitsu. It applied to my job and the seal teams as well.
You are going to get put in bad positions. The enemy might get the upper hand. You might be outnumbered or outgunned.
Panic will destroy you. You have to stay calm.
And that was only the beginning of the correlation I began to see from Gjitsu to combat to leadership to business and to life itself.
As I continued to learn Gjitsu and progress in my seal career, Gjitsu taught me much.
But it was Hicks and words that initiated my journey.
The principles of Gjitsu can be applied to every endeavor in life. You have to stay calm when you are in bad situations.
You need to cover and conceal your intent with other maneuvers. You need to utilize the simplest and most efficient methods.
You need to prioritize your focus of effort.
You need to train until you trust yourself to move intuitively without having to think. You need to move at the right time.
You need to defend critical areas.
You should not attack your enemy's strong points. You must utilize leverage.
You cannot let your emotions drive your decisions. You have to establish a good base foundation to build upon.
You cannot be overly aggressive, but you can't just allow things to happen.
When you make a move, you have to believe in what you are doing.
You have to be mentally strong. You have to keep an open mind. You have to continuously learn new techniques.
While always reinforcing the fundamentals.
You have to adapt your plan if circumstances change. The list goes on and on.
When I deployed to Iraq as a seal combat leader, I continuously operated with these fundamental principles in my head.
Once that I understood because of jujitsu. I continue to utilize these principles now in the civilian world as well as a businessman, a teacher, a father and a coach.
Jujitsu gives me confidence, but also humility.
Strength, but also compassion, a disciplined code, but also a free and open mind.
As Hickson says, jujitsu is not just a sport.
Jujitsu is a philosophy and it is at the root of everything we do.
And that right there is an excerpt from a forward written by me for a new book that is called,
brief, a life in flow. And is written by Brazilian jujitsu legend, Hickson Gracie.
And it is an honor to have Hickson here with us tonight to share some of his stories, his philosophies of jujitsu and his lessons learned.
Hickson, thank you so much for joining us. It is an honor to have you here.
My pleasure, Joko, and it is a great pleasure to see you guys. And first of all, I like to really thank you.
And it is a honor for me to have you do the introduction in the book.
It was a special compliment for me because you such a highly skilled motivation, warrior.
And we follow your scenes. That is kind of established, very high.
And for my journey, so I appreciate your support, my brother.
Yeah, I've often talked about the fact of what jujitsu gave to me.
And what jujitsu gave to me was connecting all these things.
I started to see jujitsu everywhere and everything became related to jujitsu.
And really it was in, I think it was 1996 or 1997 when I went up.
And I stayed in a crappy hotel up in Los Angeles for like, like, 10 days or something.
And I went to Pico, your academy at Pico every day.
And just was absorbing.
I'm still so far from those sessions.
I have good memories.
People ask me what it's like, what it was like to train with you.
And I said, I've told people if you've ever felt the pressure of a high-powered hose,
like a high-powered hose just water just bearing down on you.
And when you move a little bit, it doesn't matter.
It just flows around you.
That's what it felt like when you were not was rolling with you.
I everything that I tried, you were already there waiting for me.
And the pressure and the tightness but at the same time, the fluidity, it's hard to describe.
Yes, jujitsu is a very special technique because
give you the sense of utilizing your body,
but not exactly trying to stress yourself.
It's a continuous motion with leverage and angles and the ability for you to bring based on weight distribution
and different grips and maneuvers.
The chance for you to flow into harmonious control because it's not about holding and fighting for,
but it's about understanding the motions and be ahead of the game.
So when you escape from the neck, you already give me the arm and the idea for the one who's suffering,
the attack, the pressure is no relief until you tap.
But for me, it was just a continuous understanding of what's next and the ability to move and to make it be there in the right precision time.
So it's a very interesting technique and give me the chance for really use not only my techniques,
not only my physicality, but also my mindset and my emotional control.
And also what I believe is a very important tool for the spirit or water is using the spirit or energy from forgiveness and acceptance and not fear death.
And accepting the circumstances in a way to be like you said, comfortable to brain health.
So as many things which you should favor you to accept life as it is and transform the battle and a ground and a growing situation for your mind and your spirit.
So, you should be as great as you are.
You're component for anyone. Yeah, I, I try and explain to people sometimes that when you do digits or the more digits or you do,
you get to a point where you can kind to see the future because you know what this other person's going to do and when you know what they're going to do,
you're can be their waiting for them because you know what they're going to do.
And it's the same thing with any thing that you practice and you train and you pay attention to,
you can get to a point where you can kind of predict the future. And I think some people say, you know,
you're a couple moves ahead in digits and the better you get, the more moves ahead you're going to be.
Yes, similar to chess, chess game, you know,
if you play a guy who's a champion, he's already know what you're going to, when you move a piece, he knows five or ten movements ahead and he's already to
strategize your defeat. So I felt like the same as you did so you cannot dissipate the motions based on the mechanics and the,
and the tension and so you can capitalize basically always in some kind of mistake or some kind of lack of time or something like that.
So you wrote this book.
I was lucky enough like honored to be able to write the forward, but that also meant I got to read the book early and I have a copy of it here.
And just want to kind of jump into some of the book and talk about how you grew up, which is, I mean, it's just an incredible,
your journey is been incredible, your whole family's had such a huge impact on the world.
And it's very interesting to kind of hear what it was like for you and growing up inside this such an influential family.
So let's jump into the book a little bit.
Here we go. By the time I was born, my father was already one of Brazil's biggest sports icons.
In addition to being incredibly tough fighter, he was also a showman of the highest order who publicly challenged boxing icons,
Primo Carneira, Joe Lewis and Ezra Charles.
Although the boxers all declined in 1932, wrestler Fred Erberg, Ebert, accepted 17-year-old Aliose challenged.
Aliose your father. Ebert outweighed him by about 50 pounds, but they fought for an hour and 40 minutes before police stop the fight.
Two years later, my dad fought 225 pound world champion wrestler Vodic Zabisco to a draw.
When Japan's greatest judoka, Masahiko Kamira traveled to Brazil in 1951, Aliose also challenged him.
Kamira agreed to fight my dad if he could first defeat Yukio Kato, one of the black belt traveling with him.
My dad's first fight with Kato was declared a jaw, but Aliose choked him unconscious in the rematch clearing the way for a match with the judo champion.
Aliose and Kamira squared off in front of 20,000 spectators a week later, and even the president of Brazil attended the match.
But could not finish him. At one point, my dad went unconscious, but because he didn't tap, Kamira fought the choke wasn't working and released it, and Aliose regained consciousness.
In my dad refused to tap, Kamira kept twisting and ripping at his shoulder, still Aliose refused to tap, but Kamira kept cranking, and my uncle Carlos threw in the towel.
And named the Ben Armlock, the Kamira. So there's your dad. How much your dad weigh? 140 pounds? 135, yeah. Was a light guy.
And going up against Kamira, who's a beast, and by the way, you can see at least parts of this match online, you can go and Google and see this match.
Yes, Kimura was the champion in Japan, which is very unusual for a champion in Japan to become five years consecutive champion, normally every six months they trade places.
But Kimura was established in a true champion in the Japanese community.
And when he went to Brazil, my father challenged him and then he fought Kato first, and the fight with Kimura, Kimura put in the newspaper.
If he passed three minutes, he was already winning the fight, like if he very survives three minutes, he wins.
And the fight went to 13 minutes, and one point the whole crowd saying, oh, he's done, he's done, stopped the fight, he's already won.
But the fight continues and my father's back, he gets to meet with Kimura.
And even though after that fight, Kimura went to my father's house with a translator, inviting him to teach in the Imperial School in Japan, because he said, the Jujitsu, he knows Japan has forgotten.
And I don't believe he's like that, exactly, because a big part of the Brazilian Jujitsu was created by my father, exactly because my uncle Carlos learned from Kondikoma.
And my father was a champion, he's been fighting for all over and went to Brazil to settle. And he started teaching Uncle Carlos based on the friendship he has with my grandfather.
And in that process, Uncle Carlos learned a lot from my grandfather, but my uncle was 12 years younger than my uncle.
And he was very young kid at this time. And then they went to Rio in 1925, Seru in Rio.
And my uncle Carlos opened his first school in 1925. At this point, my father was, could not do any sports. He was doctor said for him, should not do anything, not playing soccer, not write a bike, not skate nothing.
Because he's very skinny and he has a vertical all the time, so he's passed out any effort, he's passing out. So he has to rest.
So my uncle opened his school, my father's sitting on the corner all the time watching my uncle teach. And for three years from 13 years old to 16, he was just watching.
I may is watching all the day, the day is all the, the say is all the moves, but he never practiced. And one day, I student arrived at the school and my uncle was not there yet.
So my father said, Mr, if you want to do, let's play a little bit to my brother arrived. So with that, they start to practice, half our later my uncle arrived.
And the student said, Carlos, if you don't mind, I like to keep training with the kid because he's so good, I love to practice with him.
So in that's the way my father gets into jujitsu practice, but different than a normal person, my father could not do one pull up, one pull up, or one push up, he don't have the strength in the muscles to do that.
So he basically, I choke for example, which is a, he learned as our movement, where you grab the colors and squeeze the guy to choke, he could not even think about choke somebody with the strength on his arms.
So he has to bring together and use the chest, which transforms the whole pressure on the choke, giving last effort musculerly and much more efficiency technically.
So just a very simple example of how my dad, in every movement he could do, he had that for him, for his own weakness.
And his another very important element is he was so light and so small, he could not ever fight on top, mount positions, passing guards and kick-ups from the top.
So he was able to just stay on the bottom, regardless, and he was able to create from the guard position, I, I knew our scenario of tricks because he has nothing to do but guard.
So he developed a guard and a very, very, very aggressive style and a Brazilian style which doesn't belong to Japan at all, all the ground techniques from the bottom are developed by my father, which as weak enough to not do other things.
So he's improved, we normally say in the family, all your grace is for you, as Einstein is to physics. He's a creator, he's a genius, he's impossible to compare.
And follow this, this idea of, of, of, total connection with the techniques and the development, the jujitsu, the Brazilian jujitsu becomes more like effective and the valetudo and the no-hots bar and effectiveness overall with gear without gear, because gives to the weaker one elements to, to submit the bigger one.
So I felt like jujitsu really becomes, of, art for a weaker one after past through, through Brazil. Before, conjicoma, conjima Idae coma was a very effective, he has many, many victories, but he was a stock guy, he was solid, strong Japanese, not to at all, but it's very solid, maybe 80 kilos or 85 kilos or something.
So he was, he was, he's his own form of artleticism, which is different than what my dad implies. So we are very grateful to have very grace in the family, to bring another possibilities for our style.
Yeah, that's, it seems like in jujitsu, when, when you have jujitsu like that, it's the situation where like you said somebody that's smaller and weaker can defeat someone that's bigger and stronger.
But he, that starts jujitsu for the first time, when I started jujitsu for the first time, you know, I was, like I said, I was 220 pounds, my first teacher was Fabio Santos. I think he weighs, I don't know, 150, 160 pounds.
He would just do whatever he wanted to me and he was an old man at the time. He was probably younger than I am right now, he seemed like he was no man, I said, I was this old man with gray hair, going to do anything to me.
So he was too allows you to do that. Jujitsu is, you know, what, what your dad, because he had, like you said, because he was smaller, because he was weaker, he had to develop that style and it's so effective. Yes, leverage replaces strength, you know, techniques replaces speed.
So when you have the perfect combination, you can anticipate the movement, you can use time, your favorite and other deflection. So it's a very interesting concept of winning without really banging heads to head, you have to make, like set him up or fake or set up in a way to, to almost surprise the guy with and defeat, not exactly smash him, you know, it's too brutal sometimes, it's too much.
Too much to boost fighting, you know, I love to see the, the articulation of a technician suppresses the strength. So for me, I always amaze about the effectiveness of, and the possibilities of Jujitsu.
I'm going to fast forward a little bit and just so everybody knows, I already skipped a bunch of the book, you know, you talk about the originations of the family. It's very interesting, you know, you came from, you had a great, what was a great, great, great grandfather that that was in the civil war on the confederate side. Yes.
And the family is in the war fair for a long time. Yeah, you mentioned, what was it, archa bald, this guy archa bald Gracie and archa bald Gracie, archa brawl of the third was a warrior, West Point, he earned superintendant Robert Lee's respect after he got beaten up in a fight on the parade grounds when Gracie was called in the Lee's office, he refused to give up the name of the man he was fighting after his opponent turned himself in, leaded not punish either of them.
When America's civil war broke out, archa bald Gracie, the third sighted with the confederacy, he started the war as a major, but after fighting heroically in some of the conflicts, fiercest battles Gracie was a brigadier general at the age of 29.
Robert Lee survived the civil war, but archa bald Gracie the third did not.
Yeah, so that's the side that went to America. Yes. I didn't know much about it, and two Peter which wrote the book, we made. Yeah, he's a historian and war, military professor, so he enlightened me with that kind of interesting story.
Yeah, I actually looked up on the internet and saw a picture of archa bald Gracie, the third dressed up and his confederate uniform. So crazy.
Yeah, you go into some more of those details which you kind of discussed about the history of how it came from Japan to Brazil, how your uncle got involved, how your brother got involved, how those details are so rich in the book.
So fascinating to read from a geetic perspective, but also just from a historical perspective in the world. I'm a fast forward a little bit.
So what it was like for you growing up, you say initially, we kids went to the academy just to play tug of war, have a game of soccer.
We were introduced to geetic slowly, nothing like what I see these days.
Today, too many parents push their kids to compete before they're ready for young kids. Juditude should be nothing more than a fun form of recreation that introduces them to the movements through games and structured play.
As they get older, you can introduce more jutsu, but it should be playful.
If you push kids too hard too young, they will quit forever.
Children should never burden their kids with their unfulfilled ambitions for stations, anxiety or any other form of emotional baggage. Parents support the parents support must be consistent.
The most important thing is that the child gets the experience when lose or draw without judgment.
So this is something a lot of parents need to hear. This is something I wish I would have heard earlier.
I was telling you before we started, I definitely pushed my kids too hard in the jujitsu.
Maybe that was my unfulfilled ambitions that I tried to impose on my own children.
And I read a book later in life.
And it talked about how you want to make things fun for your kids.
It sounds like for you guys at the beginning, the jujitsu was just fun.
Yes, because you know, it's a must for us. We no matter what we represent them.
I mean, we are graces. We all dress geese from, I mean, I get my my give before my diapers.
So we all become little graces and our identity is recognized by, oh, you're going to be a champion.
You're going to fight like that. So you, you, is a natural for you using geet training, sparring is all fun.
And I never felt like it was a serious business, even competing because my dad didn't put me pressure.
He always liked my first competition. He said to me, if he asked me if I want to compete, I said yes.
And then he said, if you win, I give you a gift. If you lose, I give you two gifts.
So that's kind of in between lines say, my dad's not going to be upset with me if I lose.
So I didn't know what's really represented that kind of statement, but I felt like my dad is not going to be upset.
So that's a plus. And I lose that fight. And I don't even remember if I get to two gifts or not.
But what I felt from that situation is my dad was not upset.
It's okay. And after that, I keep continuing competing. I was successful in my other fighters fights.
But was a good support of my dad and no pressure, make me feel like jiu jitsu is something for me to practice regardless of somebody else's judgment.
You go on to say this, you say, even as a small boy, I silently observed from close proximity, fear, courage, aggression and cowardice.
I noticed small things about people because they provided clues about their true nature.
Things as simple as the way someone shook my hand, the way people acted when they won, and the way they acted when they lost, told me a lot.
I often wondered why a guy who beat me so mercilessly made excuses not to train with my older brothers.
I didn't judge them. I just knew that I didn't want to be like them.
There's a lot of human nature that gets revealed on the jiu jitsu mats.
Oh, no doubt about it, man. I was young and I would start teaching helping my brother, who I didn't teach private lessons.
I was 13, 14 years old and I was there like a dummy. You know, so he's only down. John Mountain just to practice movements.
So I was helping him to teach.
And I got a little tip after the class. He gave me some ice cream or some, so I was there to just watch him teaching and helping.
And then I asked my dad, said, Dad, what I should do to be the best teacher.
And then he said to me, if you want to be a good teacher, you learn a good armlock, a good escape from the bottom, whatever.
And teach your student and he will be efficient on do the technique.
What if you want to be an excellent student, you have to see, you have to try to understand what the students need to learn.
So he's not about what I want to teach, he's about what he needs to learn.
So based on that, another route was created because I cannot just be a jiu jitsu teacher.
I have to be a psychologist and understand what I need to teach to make happens to make the guy seeking happiness more efficiently.
So I student with stance and claustrophobic, I teach him like to become and relax and do the movements almost in slow motion.
For the guy who stands and try to be tough and aggressive and so I come down and relax.
So the other guys are lazy.
Come up, come up, come up. So I bring the energy needs to be naturally on him. So becomes a half psychology, half jiu jitsu class.
And that's was a big transformation for me because I start to understand my service as something to enhance people's lives, qualities of life.
You know, he's not about being just a martial arts or a teacher to fight.
I have to teach you to breathe, I have to teach you to strategize, I have to teach you to have emotional control.
I have to teach you to visual make his own decisions, I have to teach you to not only using the technical elements but also the spirit of elements.
I have to teach you to have hope, faith and things like that.
So another for you to become a expert in jiu jitsu is you basically becomes a expert in life too because you know how to put yourself.
And situations and be able to recognize the situation and see if you need a better calmness in your brain, a better control in your body.
Or if you have to really surrender to a higher God and put because in one point we cannot have be afraid of death.
You know, and if you able to understand your mission, your commitment, your honor, are above that kind of that line, you become a fearless opponent because you're not afraid to die at all.
How a Navy seal can go to battle not visualizing the possibility to die. How a fireman can save a kid from a structure without the sliced chance of him to die in fall with.
So once you become comfortable and the acceptance of the result you're not in control, you become a much more complete, not warrior because you just find your mission as a priority, not exactly.
So in representing jiu jitsu was a big thing for me which transcends my life, my my physicality was something I put my honor and my faith on top of everything.
So I was able to accept in challenge and be ready for challenge which different than a soldier representing an army which you have commands you have.
Weaponry you have strategies you have situations which are not exactly up to you for me by representing my sport.
I was preparing myself for no no time limits, no rules, no cups, no mount pieces, no no weight division.
So how unpredictable this can be, how much I have to be on my toes, how much I have to accept my final moment, how much I have to be, come in the day before and order to achieve my success.
So it's a lot of complex, a lot of aspects of my life, not only the technical, not only the spirit or not only the map, I have to be checking every day and being calm enough.
So that's why in my career I was putting a lot of tension and my breathing, I put a lot of tension and take nice baths before anyone tell me about it.
I started creating situations which kind of put myself on the edge and being fearless, being connected with my spirit or guidance and accepting anything even death if it was the case.
So I was preparing myself to be a warrior but without the command, without the force behind me was just like, I have to create a lot of things to deal with the pressure.
And I felt like today, I'm not as usual, so fighting anymore, I have many injuries, but I still in my mind, sharp as always, using all my invisible tools in your jutsu to keep me on my best game in terms of using timing, using visualization, using breathing, using the capacity for me to emotional control and the capacity to surrender to the body.
And I'm not that important, thank you all my war fairs, all my situations.
I don't, I don't resolve with hate. I love to fight, I love to use jutsu, I love to represent, I love to put myself on the edge.
I love was a big, important part of my history because I never been ordered to do something, I never been obeying people to do something. I always, I free will.
I put myself in the situations I, I'm not regret but I was tough situations to be in, based on my own passion, based on my own love. So I be in a warrior which being guided by the heart, not by the rationality.
And this is kind of a little different.
Yeah, it's interesting, it's different. One of the things you said, and again, there's so many connections that I make with jutsu with battle, with life, with relationships, with everything.
And just one little example you said, there's sometimes in jutsu, you've got to calm down, you've got to remain calm, you've got to put in a bad spot, you've got to calm, you've got to relax, you've got to not panic, you've got to think your way through it, you've got to wait for your moment.
There's other times in jutsu where if you don't explode and make a move right now, it's going to be too late.
Yes. And you have to, and it's the same thing, and you know if you're, if you're in a business, you might have a situation where you've got to calm down, you've got to make a decision, you've got to think through it.
But there's other times where you've got to make a move right now, on the battlefield, same thing, sometimes something start to happen, you're starting to see the enemy do something, and you need to wait and become and relax and detach and not get emotional.
There's other times, something happens, you've got to go right now and jutsu, you start to identify that look, there's times where you've got to take a step back relax, you've got to be calm, and there's other times where you've got to be aggressive, you've got to make things happen right now.
And those type of lessons that again, I learned them, I learned them a little bit from my seal training, I learned them a little bit interacting with my, from a leadership perspective.
But when I really started to see it, when I, when I started to change jutsu all the time and started recognizing, oh, sometimes you've got to become, sometimes you've got to be aggressive, sometimes you've got to be flexible, sometimes you've got to be strong in that position.
And you've got to be no when to make these adjustments in your life.
I feel like with the practice of jutsu, like you said, give you more awareness of the situation to be in, and the sense of applying the right action for the situation is based on reflexes, is based on practice, is based on preparation.
Which sometimes that preparation comes from understanding, strategic one understanding, sometimes that preparation coming from a heavy training, a heavy muscular and explosive training.
Or sometimes the preparation coming from a completely emotional control. I was kid about 12, 13 years old, practice with men's at the academy. After the class everybody training a little bit together.
And they all take care of me, I was a kid still and training with adults.
And in one particular practice this strong guy, Blue Belt, gave me a headlock. And I was caught in a headlock, I was not able to escape. I was not able to be comfortable and normally we don't tap in our headlocks because you can keep him, keep breathing.
But I was a good guy, and I was like, I was like, I'm okay, thank you.
So I was pissed and I went back home.
And when I arrived, I decided to lay down on the floor on top of a carpet and ask my brother, I kind of stayed like straight like this, and ask my brother to roll me in the carpet like a burrito.
And it was like a summer time in Brazil about 110 human, very hot. And I said, just take me from here and 10 minutes.
So first minute was struggling, cost for fobic, and I started thinking about seagulls and breeze on the ocean and ocean breeze and the nice wind.
Eventually passed through the experience, my brother relieved me. And then in the same year I did three more times, just to make sure I could handle that kind of suffocating agony and claustrophobic feeling.
So that's just to show how competitive I was and how much on top of my problems, I was fixing my problems as the problems happened.
And I was just comfortable and become, you know, agonizing and breeding suffocating and then I started to become and find myself in peace.
And then I felt like, this is not going to happen with me anymore. I never going to tap and head locks anymore because was just the way I felt like I was fixing my emotional.
Yeah, that's, you're confronting your weaknesses, what you're doing. I remember when I started GG2, I hated being on the bottom because I was bigger.
And if I could get on top of someone, I could smash him and be okay. And I hated being on the bottom. And for that reason, I remember one time for it.
I was supposed to be in a year every, every time I rolled with anybody, I started on the bottom and oftentimes with them across side or maybe even mount just to get used to that and get over the fact that I didn't like it.
You have to con, in GG2, just like life, you got to face your weaknesses and you got to correct them.
Yes, definitely.
Now you mentioned your, your brother holes. I want to give just a little bit of background of your family, which is hard to give a quick background of your family.
Yeah, so many, it's crazy. It's huge.
You have this section here.
Carlos Gracie, this is your uncle, decided to, this is, so he lost two loves of his life. He lost his fiance and was his fiance in his first wife.
Is that right? Yes. They both died. So after they died, Carlos Gracie decided to father as many children, preferably boys as possible and he encouraged my father to do the same.
There goes to create a clan of fighters between 1932 and 1967, Carlos and Alio, fathered 30 children with eight different women, 20 one of them were boys.
When Margarita, my, my father's first wife, the woman I consider my mother was unable to get pregnant, my uncle came up with a plan. My father, with my mother's knowledge and consent, would impregnate our African Brazilian babysitter,
Baleena, my son, Baleena, yes, Baleena, who gave birth to me to me and my older brothers, Hory and and Helsen.
The whole thing was in a lab at Rousse, Margarita wore a fake belly during Baleena's pregnancies and when the time came for her to give birth, she went to the hospital and came home with a baby, not even her best friends knew.
When I was young, I looked at myself in the mirror and saw freckles. I thought they were from my Scottish blood. Little did I know I was half African Brazilian.
Then that's a crazy story. Yes, man. That's part of the, the, the, the Gracie,
the fanatic idea of growing jujuts and creating a clan, you know, was just epic.
So with that, let me, let me go a little bit for this. Now you got all these brothers. I go back to book. I, this is fast-forward a little bit.
I studied all my brothers with great interest when we trained because they had different strengths and weaknesses. I want to know who is brave, who is scared, who would fight to the death, who is crazy, who is indecisive.
Nobody impressed me more than my brother-holes. A decade older than me, he was our leader and my idol because he was an incredibly charismatic person and a natural warrior.
Holes was Uncle Carlos's son from Claudia, an 18-year-old woman who worked for my family because my mother Margarita could not have children.
Uncle Carlos gave holes to my dad to raise as his own son when he was a baby.
Holes grew up with us and shared a room with me from much of my childhood. And this is what's interesting when you talk about holes fast-forward a little bit.
My brothers opened mind helped him in jujitsu because he was willing to look outside of it for ideas when other family members were not.
Holes trained and competed in judo, wrestling and sombo which he used to improve jujitsu. Like Alio, he always wanted to win by submission and had an aggressive attacking style.
If I disappointed, the holes there was nothing that I was not willing to do to redeem myself.
That holes with that attitude that opened mind where he was doing sombo and wrestling. I mean that's a game changer.
Completely, he was just such a brave fighter and warrior and competitive and if I could open mind to understand. Jujitsu is great, but doesn't have the ability to throw as a judo.
Doesn't have the ability to get some other situations like wrestling, some maneuvers from bottom to the top, some reverses. So adding this, we're not going to hurt nobody.
It's just going to add for us the capabilities of not only controlling better from the top, throwing better from the outstanding aspect.
And also, we do what we do, good in terms of jujitsu. So it was just a complete improvement in our capacity to handle the athletes all over.
So it was just a great addition. And for me, Holes, always being the number one guy who pushed me the most, different than Hordeon, which is very technical.
But Hordeon was less competitive. So when I was very competitive, so I was seeking to do what Holes does.
You mentioned Hordeon here a little bit. Nine years older than me, my brother Horyon could not have been more different than Holes.
Ali was first son with our birth mother, Balinda. Horyon was ten months younger than Holes. Horyon had an easygoing nature.
And while he was never the fighter that Holes was, he was a born teacher.
Training with Horyon included the theory behind such concepts as positioning technique, leverage and base. He explained jujitsu much better than Holes, who was inpatient and saw things as either block or white.
He had a big influence on my teaching style and got me to focus as much on the person as the techniques.
Our father taught us that a good teacher taught the techniques well, but that a great teacher taught what in the each individual student needed to learn in strife or in life.
Horyon was a great teacher. Eight years older than me, this is another brother. Holes and might have been the best fighter in the family if he wasn't such a wild man.
Holes and would show up at a tournament having had no sleep still hung over from a night on the town, but when he put his on his gui and tight his belt, he turned into a Tasmanian devil.
Holes and would fight all day, almost die, but win.
This is a fast forward a little bit, just a little glimpse into what it's light being in the family.
A Leo encouraged competition among us and always wanted to see who stood where in the Gracie food chain.
There were confrontations in test. My dad would step on the canvas, tarp, clap his hands and say, okay, Horyon, Holes, go.
And without hesitation, they would step forward and spar. Holes and Horyon had totally different attitudes toward life, which were reflected in their jiu-jitsu.
There was never any question that Holes was the best of our generation.
Now, you get this sort of side of the martial arts family growing up training all the time,
but you're also in Rio, which is a crazy place and the lifestyle that you had going on there, which you talk about here going to the book,
Rio is like New York City in Bangkok combined.
It is a turbulent, whatever you want, whenever you want it, mix of sex, crime, drugs, nature and beach culture.
Although we lived in a nice apartment in Copa, Cabana, Rio is not like LA. There's not a rich town like Beverly Hills and then a poor one like Compton.
They are combined. One minute you're in Beverly Hills and the next you turn down a side street and you are in Compton.
As a kid, I developed street smarts from gang bangers to fighters to the high society matrons to the surfers to the most beautiful girls in Ipanema.
I wanted to understand all of it. I would often ditch school and just walk around Rio. I had normal rounds that I made through the city.
So you're kind of living this crazy, turbulent, turbulent lifestyle.
And you're just drawn to that.
Very much because in my house, I was the youngster and the Holes, Hordeon and Hels, was eight, nine and ten years older than me.
So when I bought the 11 to 12, I'd like to hear what they say to keep up with, you know. So for me, when I go home, I was listening and learning with those smart guys, you know.
And when I go to the street, I don't want to stay with the ten, eleven year olds, which are just thinking about silly things.
I was just to walk with older guys, talking about things I hear my brother stalk.
And the guy said, hey, this kid is not, he's not the one he's saying. So I was trying to be very, you know, compatible with the higher level street guys.
I said, I see on the street. So that's kind of poomin and I'm a very soft place because I have to be smart.
I have to be very much solid with them, show no fear, show, so to be able to walk with them, to be able to get in the car and go some surf somewhere.
So I was there to just show them I can handle, you know. So I was just, give me a mission I will do, you know.
Sometimes the guys, they want to smoke pot, for example, and nobody wants to go in the dealerspot because they all want to afraid of the cops.
I was 12, 11. I said, I can go with my trunks, I can go up and down, hide the thing and nobody going to see it.
So I was just being like the kid, which helps the older guys to get what they, so I was just doing things regardless of right or wrong.
I just try to keep myself in a position to be respected from the boys on the hood, you know.
And being like, I street guy, not exactly a spoiled kid, which forbidden to play on the street or something.
So I was just taking care of my life as I was 18, 19 and I was just 12, you know.
And you ended up kind of running with a gang of kids. Oh yeah, I mean, for me was a demonstration of courage, demonstration of being tough.
You know, it was not about doing right or wrong. It's about being able to keep with the boys and be respected and the hood as a guy who can not go to flick, you know, not going to.
So that's kind of give me a good sense of be part of a team, which is a tough team. The guys, they all fighters, they all tough kids, they all, you know, very, very much.
Born to just do trouble and things.
And I was starting to grow in up a little bit. I started to see all those values I learned on the street.
I should not value, I should take in my life as if I want to grow up and represent what I want. So my mission, my passion for the family was take me away from that dark side of being just doing problems and start to become more an athlete and becoming completely focus on my life as a representative of Jiu Jitsu.
But we for sense of base and sense of, you know, I, I'm not going to let my friends down. I'm always good to be a solid, you know, no matter if it's going, you know, if it's a good thing, if it's a wrong thing, I want to be part of and be trusted by my friends. So that's what I accomplish.
Yeah, it seems like you, you, you've ventured into that world of sort of that gang mentality and then you say here in the book, I began to drift away from the gang when members started stealing stereos and using guns.
I knew they were on a path that would take them nowhere fast and I was much more interested in Jiu Jitsu surfing and girls that life for crime.
Although I was rebellious and did things that my dad didn't agree with, I never stopped competing and never stopped winning in his eyes that made me special. It was about this time that I began to train with my brother holes up to this point, Alio was my teacher.
Whether he was surfing, training, fighting, writing horses, hand gliding or chasing girls, holes was constantly in motion. He was fast, technical, and always pushed me to train, harder and achieve more.
Training with holes was essentially fighting. He reinforced what Alio had taught me. Fuck points, fuck judges, win by submission or not at all. I began to improve quickly under holes and Alio was not surprised.
I wasn't stubborn and never choked under pressure. Now the expectations for me were both from holes and my dad and they were extremely high.
How many hours a day were you training with holes at this time?
At least four hours. At least two hours in the morning or early afternoon for classes and then at the training at night.
So I was always at the school. I was never been too much a good student.
So I get any excuse to stay away from school and stay at the academy or at the beach. But you know, was a good training very fun.
How much time would you spend sparring? How much time would you spend drilling? How much time would you spend creating new stuff?
Normally the class follows up with a sequence of drilling, learning some techniques, some drills, and after the free sparring. So I follow the protocols of the class and I always going to learn something, training something or grabbing some kind of technique and also the practice afterwards. So I just follow the program of every class.
Did you find yourself and holes, especially as holes is bringing in sombo and wrestling? Would you have to break stuff down and kind of adapt it into the jujitsu? Do you remember doing that kind of thing?
I remember holding the techniques and we immediately because he also have the eye for what's good for us or not. I always not learning from my wrestling teacher.
I was teaching. I was learning from a guy who learns wrestling but is a jujitsu teacher and try to favor us with the best of it. So things he made learned and he didn't like it. He not even show us.
He just showed the things we are related to. I grabbed you here on the show. You do that. So I was just follow up his lead on what I should use from wrestling.
What I should use from sambo. What I should use from judo. Some techniques in judo are suicidal techniques and pull you after the throw.
You get caught in a bad position. So you don't want to do those techniques so basically I was not that you learned judo.
I was that you learning. I efficient way to take people down with judo but for jujitsu.
So it was that all the preparation the techniques are kind of slightly different than being a just judo practitioner.
I was lucky. My son when he wrestled he had a wrestling coach that started working with his wrestling team. That was a jujitsu guy too.
And so he could tell him, hey, do this. Like hey, this is like a sweep. This is like a scissors sweep. He would be able to coach him to wrestle using jujitsu with wrestling.
You can relate much better. Yeah. Yeah. Nice. And you're surfing all the time at this point too. Yes. Yes. You're going to some pretty good details there about some of the some of the experiences you had surfing pushing yourself a little hard sometimes.
You can some risks that maybe you shouldn't take it in the water. Yes. Because for me surfing was not exactly just the practice of the ability to go down in the wave and carve and do this snaps or whatever.
Surf for me has to do with nature with the power of the ocean. So sometimes when the waves are too big. First thing to do is get afraid because you don't know what's going to happen if you get power. So dealing with this fear knowing and strategizing the best way to go in and out of the surf.
When you get the wave the timing of the wave. So it's a lot of things which has to keep you in control of the situation not only the ability to surf but to to stay calm to to paddle in the right direction to understand nature the wind the the the the rib currents.
So is a is a lot of things to learn and to be comfort the point sometimes in a very comfortable situation so the ocean plays a very important teacher for me because you cannot fight nature.
You have to understand nature and deal with in the best way possible. So that's surf it was a very important for me in terms of the reading the ocean and stay connected with the ocean and a more and the the most deepest.
The most deepest way I could possibly do and surf was just a bonus.
I guess it's the same thing with with opponents right because of opponent has some really good move that they're really strong at.
What's the point in fighting that move that they're really good at go go at them from some different direction of course the perfect strategy is work.
You're strengths on his weakness. So when you feel like you're losing the perfect aim about where he weakness is you have to shift not just try to force the wrong entrance but find another way to to get the whole you know.
So that's the idea of you, she's just capitalizing on your opponents mistakes and be aware of if he changes you have to flow and change again and again.
No expectations you may be expect a choke but it's going to arm locks going to happen. So everything can be unpredictable if you do right.
I'm going to fast forward a little bit to this section here by the time I was a brown belt my matches with my brother holes were getting closer.
I was beginning to understand the limitations of his game holes had an excellent neon belly move that he used to set up arm locks and he was lethal if he got your back.
But he was also predictably aggressive.
In our final 10 training sessions not only did holes not submit me but I was getting reversals and our fights were now even.
One afternoon we were training together by ourselves at my dad's ranch. The only thing I remember is engaging with roles then going through the eye of the hurricane with all the violence you would expect when the storm passed I had holes in a choke and before I even realized what was happening he was tapping.
It was a completely reactive fight. I'm not even sure if I was mounted around his back all I remember that I finished him with a choke.
I felt saw me beat holes and when we finished training he hugged and kissed me on the cheek and said you did good kid I'm proud of you.
What I remember most about that fight was the sadness I felt afterward as the way I had made a mistake by beating him a huge but invisible weight of responsibility had shifted from holes as shoulders to mine.
I knew that I was now a better fighter but worse so did he. It wasn't luck or a fluke holes just didn't just couldn't surprise me anymore.
I also realized that I would never have to beat him again to prove it.
Were you bigger than him or are you smaller than him or are you guys about the same size?
I was a little bigger this time maybe five to ten pounds heavier. He was maybe one sixty eight pounds and I was seventy four.
No he was sixty eight kilos and I was seventy four kilos.
You get your black belt.
And that's you know this is always an interesting thing when someone you know you get that edge on someone that's been beating you for your whole life.
Yes, it was a very special feeling because I have him as my idol as my coach as my training partner.
But at the same time my goal was beating him because no other way I have to change this pattern.
I have to to be the best so my goal as a student is to be better than my teacher.
And when I achieved that I felt like somehow was was not exactly positive the way I felt because I put him in a bad side and a bad mode or feeling he was not exactly the best anymore.
He's number two.
So it was a sad thing for me and was a happy thing for me but my my my demonstration of love and respect was after that even though we go in every tournament and I go in he I go in my way division he go in his way division and we go both for open.
And before that we close the bracket because we could not fight before the finals because we're representing the same brand.
So and the finals I always gave it to him the victory we got not fighting him and even after I could be able to beat him I still doing this for life you know and to he pass out.
So I always gave it to him because I felt like he was my.
I honor his representative to me and so he was going to beat number one and I'm number two.
For the word I can be throw the line through to the lines before him but in the official tournament where he goes with me.
I would be capable in my honor and my integrity to take his medal you know or to fight him or to tell him I'm better than him.
So he was the champion of the family and two he passed away and after he passed I take I take the responsibility for myself.
And when I turn with people and I'll be training with them for a long time and you know sometimes I say one day I'm going to get you you know they have that goal one day I'm going to get you and I always say yeah of course and I say listen.
And if you put a jiu jitsu move on me that I didn't expect right and see coming we'll happen. Let's go to happen I'm going to tap that's the way it works.
It's beautiful thing yeah that's what we train for.
You have a situation here where you had a little lesson learned you said I was growing so dominant jitsu competition that when I stepped on the mat and the referee said go the crowd would begin to chat chant.
And then nine eight seven six if I didn't submit my opponent in ten seconds they would start counting again even as a black belt my only jiu jitsu fight that went more than five minutes came after the judges robbed my brother hoiler of a win against one of my cousin Carlson students.
My final match was in the open class was against Carlson's 240 pound heavyweight I was so upset that I decided that I wanted to make him suffer after I got him down I mounted and just put unbearable pressure on him.
I was not fighting my actual opponent instead I was trying to punish Carlson for robbing hoiler.
I'm God I wasn't that guy.
Everything I was doing was fueled by ego and anger and I was working against myself because my emotions were negating all my precision and martial artistry.
I was spinning my wheels as if I were on ice going nowhere I was just blindly punishing him until until holds yelled eight minutes are up I was shocked to see.
I was shocked because that was too long I snapped to my senses got mad on myself and easily submitted him afterward I realized that I never wanted to fight like this again because I was putting emotion before reason although nobody else realized that the time I learned an important lesson that day that it was a mistake to fight emotionally because emotions blinded me.
Yes, I think the biggest experience I have in that matter was on my first fight with Zulu which I was 19 he was 30 something years old he had 120 fights and only four draws and 120 victories.
So he was a professional, a valid to the guy no holds bar fighter and I was just watching my dad talking in the phone with his manager trying to set up somebody to fight him.
And my dad said no man I'm sorry about them I don't have nobody to fight this guy because you know we are and then I catch the conversation said that please pull me and pull me and pull me and look at me and said yes for them I have here my son with 19 years old.
He made one a try and what they must have said no he's not something I try out for a kid the guy stuff is mean.
And as my as the guy tried to talk my dad out of the deal my dad's got emotionally but I think I'm going to put him because I like to try the kids see how goes.
So and then set up a fight for me with this Zulu guy and I went to the his state the capital.
And then the day of the fight.
We engage he has this kind of typical move he does which goes and put one hand between your legs and connect you and then lift everything and throw you back on the floor some kind of cataguruma in his style.
How much how much Zulu away?
About 230 and he's just a beast of a human you said he had 100 and something fights.
Yes, he was just an orthodox he has no sharp techniques but he was just a very intuitive animal very flexible very strong very many you know.
A very complete fighter for the time.
And I was to start to deal with him and as he go for his straight move and this is what sorry for interrupting you but this is your first actual fight that you're ever going to fight my first.
And he's a very unique fighter and that's what he's doing.
And how many people are at this fight?
About 10,000.
5,000 people.
And you have the gracing name?
Yes.
At stake.
Your 19 years old?
Yes.
How much are you?
About once I mean 74 kilos.
Yeah, 75.
He came for the straight move.
I kind of understood why he came.
I hold his shoulders and his head was down.
So I hit him with my knee.
The strongest hit, the solid hit I could imagine possibly give to somebody.
And after the hit, he just lifted his head.
And he had shook his face like speed at two.
And come like nothing happened.
And I get scared.
I get to the ground.
I thought I want to kill the guy and he just shook his hand.
He's head.
So we start to back to the engagement and he threw me off the ring.
I went back again and I got him in the back many times.
He hit him with the elbow.
He threw himself out of the ring and we start again.
And again after the first round 10 minutes we stopped.
And I was dead tired.
So I was crawling through my corner.
And when I get the corner said dead, I quit.
I cannot go anymore.
I'm exhausted.
Dead not even hear me.
He said, oh he's the worst.
And you're going to do it.
He's going to do it.
I'm serious.
I start to argue with my dead.
Trying to clean my case.
He said, hey man, I'm exhausted.
I'm tired.
And he didn't even listen to me.
He started to kill me.
And then my brother hauled me a bucket with water and ice and my head.
And then the bell rings and I back to the action.
And like my dad said, three minutes after he was sleepy.
I could get his back.
He was tired.
I choke him out.
And then I realized my worst enemy was my mind.
Was the worst enemy I could ever have.
You're not going to handle the guy is strong.
So I realized if I was trusting myself, I was done.
So I could not have this enemy, this powerful enemy hanging on my head all the time.
So I decide now I will fight to die.
But I'm not going to quit anymore.
Quitting is not my word anymore.
Either you're going to die or I'm going to win.
But no Quitting.
So it was maybe the biggest lesson in action I have ever had because I wouldn't stand.
How your apart mindset can really kill you from waiting.
And I understood that and from that home I was just putting all my mental, spiritual, physical and one direction.
And the other direction is only that.
No Quitting, no.
But I think I'm done nothing like this.
So my brother has the idea of if something happened through the towel because I'm not going to quit.
So in that kind of make me happy because I become a warrior in a good direction.
And thanks my dad for letting me quit.
Sometimes I bet you can kill you.
I bet coach can kill you if he has saved your moments.
You know, so you have to transcend that kind of panicking and just back to normal and regain confidence.
And after I learned that I was completely different guy.
I'm much more superior entity in terms of putting everything to go.
All my back edge was together always and I felt like it was a blast by that.
Now I was going to ask you how you changed or what did you learn from that fight from a training perspective.
What did you do different?
But I know that this is around this time that this one you got way into doing yoga with Orlando Connie.
Yes, I was a little before that because since my 12 year old, the weather rolled myself on the carpet.
Feeling the panicking, the claustrophobic feeling was always close to me a little bit.
I always been an athlete, I always run forever, training forever and young guy.
It was always been natural for me being competitive and fight and do whatever.
But at one point, if you don't have, if you don't master breathing, when you get to tie it, you get confused, you get your mind fading away.
It's not an easy way, enough oxygen in your brain and your muscles for you to feel clear mind and still getting tired and still sharp.
So I felt like it was always a lack of this profound understanding.
And one day because my mother hit Pumichu Du Yoga in one point and I did and I stopped because I didn't like it.
I transcended our meditation which make you see it and repeat a mantra for a while and start to open your mind.
I also ended up by sleeping almost all the time and not teaching a doctor much about it by that, so it was not for me.
And then a friend recommended me to go to Orlando Connie, which was Army Pentatl on champion.
He was also a yoga teacher and it was to start to develop some kind of exercising with movement and breathing which can be very helpful.
So I went that to this guy and he knows my dad, he's very friendly guy, he said, okay, so go to the class and practice with us.
So I started to go into his class with other people and he started to practice.
And right on the second time he said, he's very flexible, very strong, even top high athlete.
I like to teach you personally because I can improve your speed, I can improve you personally more than the class.
He said great.
So I started to do in the film a couple of times a week, only privately with him and his place which is mirrors.
And one side has the wall and has the wood attached on the wall for you to hang.
So from here to the roof, all his wood is kind of, so you play different games and you sometimes you imitate a manker, sometimes you imitate a hero, a crocodile or whatever.
So you play animals and moves and breathes and he's touched it, teach me to work the diaphragmatic breathing.
And that's going for a month, for two months, almost three months on that.
One day we about to initiate the practice, he said, he's so, I mean, the bell rings, the phone rings.
And he said, you keep doing because I'm going to take the phone and come back.
So for the first time I was doing the exercise without a leader.
I was improvising myself to do my things and breathing and doing my things and breathing and things going.
And then eventually I opened my eyes like wake up.
And I was hanging on the top wall, on the top wood and the wall side, hanging like a monkey, dripping sweat.
And I opened my eyes and I kind of started to understand where I was, I kind of wake up and I saw, all along the city, I mean standing up on the corner.
And he said to me, kind of crying a little bit, he said, hexon.
I don't think you need me anymore because you achieved the highest level.
I said, why you say that, master, why you say that?
Said because you're here for an hour and 50 minutes.
And I call you a few times, I try to get your attention and you cannot even hear me.
You completely admit, meditative state of mind, empty mind, doing your things, breathing, moving.
And now you just wake up.
Now you just put yourself conscience again.
Before it was just reflexes and subconscious mind.
And I realized I could achieve meditative state of mind, empty mind, through that practice.
So through that practice which I start to do and then my academy on the beach, I start to understand breathing.
And I much more profound way, not only to help me mechanically, not only to help me to charge myself and review my energy from the oxygen standard point.
But also to give me some kind of meditative state of mind, empty mind, be drunk, will be able to control my emotions.
So this practice becomes a central part of my life because by breathing, I could be able to not only have a better functional strength and ability to recover faster from tiredness.
But also what is very interesting is the lungs because the heart and the brain are the only organs who are able to give and receive information.
So sometimes you can get affected by reading a bed in May or you can get a stress immediately, get affected.
Sometimes you see something which is relevant, somebody will love or somebody touch you.
You immediately emotionally bite the heart, they can get information and they can send information for you and say, I'm not happy.
Some take care of me, I'm not happy, the care of me, I'm very exhausted. So your tired, your heart can tell you or your brain, or I'm confused and stressed, I'm afraid I'm out of my game.
So the brain and the heart are there to be controlled by the lungs.
These are the most fast, the most effective way for you to deal directly with your brain and with your heart.
For example, if you hear, you just read a bed in May and you stress.
If I keep that routine for three minutes, no stress can keep on because I have to control.
I have to integrate motion and movement, breathing and movement together.
And as I start to play on this, nothing can be like, I cannot think about all the time to travel.
I have to go to San Diego tomorrow, I have to give my daughter whatever it is.
You have to refresh her because the way you breathe, you can really clean your mind.
The way you breathe, you can lower your heart rates for fighting, for example, I was doing like I get an event, three hours before the event, my fight.
So I go to the locker room, sleep for an hour and a half hour, 40 minutes, by wheel, I just breathing my relax, breathing and can sleep deeply.
Wake up one hour before the fight, warm myself up for 45 minutes, putting my heart rates to 160, 140 to really break the sweat and make sure I'm cool.
And then sit for five minutes and being my heart rate to 65, hard beats a minute.
So I was deeply raw hot, ready to go with my heart beat, boom, boom, boom, boom.
So I see my other opponent and the other side of the ring jumping around, he's already 85, 90.
So when I engage, I engage not to make some kind of nice reading, I try to improve press the gas and let's go for power.
So we do everything we can do. So if I'm a struggle, you cannot rest, you have to keep up with me.
So when I'm 80, you 110, when I'm 110, you 150, when I'm 150, you already try to, I had a hard attack.
So you start to regroup and start to seek for air and that's time normally where mistakes happen and I really make the close the deal.
So breathing, being come at my best friend, not only to control my emotions, to keep my heart rate and the best performance to regroup.
So to be controlling panic, controlling emotions, become calm, to strategize, everything coming from this capacity, we tend to control yourself by breathing.
So I felt like was a great addition to my, my pratics and makes a huge change in my life.
This is something that I connected the dots on a few years ago because people would ask me, I would say, listen, when things are going bad, you have to stay calm, you have to learn how to control your emotions and don't get all excited about something which things are going wrong.
And people would say, well, how do you do it? And one of the things that I realized that I would do is, so in the military, you know, you have a radio with you.
And when you talk on the radio, everybody can hear you.
And in the military, it's very frowned upon if you get on the radio and you are emotional, if you scream, help over here.
If you panic like this. So every time I ever talked on the radio, my goal was to never sound, panic, never sound emotional, no matter what was going on, sound very common cool.
So that means whenever things were going crazy and I was about to have to get on the radio, what would I have to do?
I had to breathe. I had to take a breath.
And so it's the same thing, it's just that something that I was doing, so that I could, you know, I'd be in the, oh, there's got stuff going on here. Okay, I'm about talking radio.
Hey, this is Jaka. We need about 10 more guys down at this building right now.
And that me taking control of my of my breath also would help me get into a controlled emotional state where I'm not losing my mind.
That's very powerful from Jiu Jitsu. Yes, because you know the, the breathing system, because you stay seven days without food, you stay three days without water.
Five minutes without oxygen, it was already dead. Yes. So the efficiency of the breathing system is very needed and people take this for granted. They don't, I, I, I, I born, I get slap on the butt.
And you are live and well and you can live like if you don't training breathing, it's like your biceps, it's like your, your, your strategy, your techniques, your, if you don't training the breathing system, you're going to work with 40% less the capacity, the capabilities to really refresh yourself, hyperventilate,
bringing yourself to a next level of understanding because if you get tired, you don't know how to hyperventilate, you get tired in your mind, start to phase to fade a little bit, you start to making poor decisions, you start to get
completely off your game because it's no oxygen enough for the brain and the, and the body. But if you know how to hyperventilate, you can have cramps, as it's a lot of callover, you can not even move well, very tired, but your brain is too sharp, you can see the tails, you can see the, the gals, my, you can see the support, you can see everything you want to see and talk because your brain is too fresh.
And that's the capacity you have to learn how to hyperventilate and use the diaphragmatic breathing, which improves your life like a don.
That's awesome stuff. Going through the book, I mean, at this time, you also, you had met your, you had met Kim. Yes, you, she got pregnant with your first son. Yes, at this time.
And she was what some kind of a model, some kind of a several years old. She was the first sponsor, surfer girl in Brazil. She was doing hangliding.
She was a top model for fashion. She do some, some modeling for, for soap operas and stuff. So she was pretty, pretty hot girl at the time.
I'm going to fast forward a little bit here. So you, you have your first son. It says the year 1982 was a bittersweet one.
I was now the father of the son. I had always dreamed of, but I also suffered a devastating loss in June, holes and his family went for a family weekend in the mountains.
holes noticed his old hanglider was strapped the roof of a car in front of his hotel. It turned out that the owner was a friend of a friend.
Even though my brother had promised his wife, Angela, that he would quit hangliding after he'd had several close calls and friends had died in accidents. He made arrangements to go the next day.
The following day, the conditions were very bad because there was no wind. If holes got his mind set on something, however, there was no saying no to him.
Although the owner of his old hanglider did not want to go because he thought it was too dangerous, holes talked him into letting him use it for just one flight.
My brother ran down the ramp, launched, initially got some lift, but then began to spiral and he hit the ground 90 yards from the ramp.
His friend ran into the overgrown forest and found my brother hanging upside down with his eyes wide open, although he looked perfectly fine. His neck was broken and holes was dead.
I received the news over the phone and it took only seconds to know that my life would never be the same.
But I lost an idol, a teacher, and my favorite brother, but I was now officially the family champion. Now I would have to answer all the challenges and lead the next generation of Gracie Fighters.
I was now my family's last line of defense.
His death affected our family dynamics dramatically.
He was at the two sides together because he was Carlos' son, but raised by Alio. He acted as a bridge between the two sides of the family, but now that bridge was gone forever.
I know my original teacher, Fabio Santos. He was originally a host as well.
The way he talked about holes was elevated beyond belief.
Fabio has a passion for holes, not only for the teachings and being a huge guy and inspire him to do the best, but they also have a lot of chinkoamu.
They go out together, so they're good friends, so what's devastating for Fabio?
At this time, on top of all this, you start to have this kind of famous rivalry with Luta Livri Fighters.
I had some interesting things going on there. Again, this book is filled with so many of these details that people will be interested in.
Meanwhile, you have a daughter, right?
Yes.
Your first daughter.
And then a second daughter.
Now you're up to three kids, and again, these are all things that are detailed in the book and all kinds of interesting stories around that. You also say the Gracie Clan continued to divide along bloodlines.
While Horyn was trying to establish our martial arts in the United States, Carlos Gracie Jr. was going in a different direction in Brazil and primarily focusing on a competitive form of Gigiitsu that would become known as sport Gigiitsu.
And this is what a thing I appreciated. You said, I had little interest in the politics of Gigiitsu. I had three children to support. I wanted to fight Valaituto professionally and the only place to do that outside of Brazil was in Japan.
So at this point, Horyn had moved to America.
Yes.
And you're looking at possibly fighting in Japan.
Yes. Going with my friend to Japan, you see if I can find some, I was having a letter of introduction to Antonio Noche, which was in Bassa, daughter in Japan, very famous wrestler.
And I tried to find a pick a fight through him in Japan.
So I was there, but I was, you know, I could not achieve my goal and back to Brazil.
And then you have Crone, his born. Yes.
And now things are really seem to be heating up with the Luta Leveria Academy.
And there's a, at one point, you guys drove over to the Luta Leveria Academy.
I got him. Yes.
You say here, we walked in in 20 or 30 fighters, stop training and stared at us.
Marco, who asked, walked over and greeted us. Everyone's very respectful at first.
I told who asked that I heard he wanted to fight me and I was there to fight him.
He said that he wanted to fight, but that would, that he would need four months to prepare.
This made me feel that he was more interested in capitalizing on the fight than proving himself, which pissed me off.
I was the one who walked into that lion's then ready and willing to fight for nothing but honor.
It started to get heated and my dad stepped between us to calm things down.
And then you have Hugo Dwarthe, it's kind of stepped in and, you know, saying, hey, I'll fight you too.
And then you said, I had a friend tell Hugo to meet me at Pay Pay Beach on Saturday.
I got sick the week of the fight and was thinking about postponing it until my messenger called and said,
it's all set. Hugo will be there on Saturday.
Now I knew there was no backing out, so I started to eat well and get ready.
You get to the beach.
I walk up to Hugo and slap them in the face.
He took off his shirt and sandals and we began to wrestle and defeat until I was able to drag him to the ground.
Hugo used my pony tail to control my head and stood back up.
He fell on top of me then I swept him, but my knee got buried in the sand and Hugo escaped.
We stood back up and smashed into a vendor stand that we went down on the ground again with the crowd surging all around us.
Again, get wrapped in and begin to punch him in the face out will.
There was nothing he could do to stop the punches.
When I asked Hugo if you wanted to give up, he said, you'll have to kill me.
So I kept blasting him with punches and elbows.
After a few more blows to the face, he changed his mind and said, okay, stop.
I let him go.
That's another one you can find on YouTube.
That'll be a fight.
Probably has a billion views.
Fast forward a little bit of a week later, I was sleeping when my friend pulled up in front of the apartment on his motorcycle and screamed,
Hicks and those motherfuckers invaded your dad's academy.
Boy, that seems like a bad move.
It seems like a real bad move.
Yes, but it was crazy.
They came for a revenge.
Hugo was prepared for a next fight.
He was not happy with what happened on the beach.
So as they walk maybe about three or four miles walk from a different area of the city.
And some of the guys who are with him are coming from the girls, like gang bang.
They come in with like the face masks on the face, guns, knives, bottles.
I mean, all crazy, not only fighters but also gang bangers.
So when I get into the school, when I was getting in my friend's motorcycle on the
street, I saw about 200 people in front of the school.
Half of the street already, we fool of guys, so the traffic was jammed.
So I get into with my bike, with my friends bike inside the crowd.
And immediately go up to the stairs on the street, going to the school.
And I meet Hugo coming down with my father and other guys, like about 20 Luta, Levery guys.
They stood and so we all meet in the middle of the stairs.
So I said, let's go down and talk and fight.
So we went down to the parking lot.
And I call him with his coach and another guy who fought a lot afterwards, the Ogenio Tadio.
They went to a corner and my father and we talk.
And I said to him, hey man, I respect you.
I see you come here for a revenge and I accept that.
But you brought a lot of bad guys, a lot of guys who has no integrity, no fighters.
If somebody touched the fight before this over, you're going to end up on the ditch sometime.
I promise you, you're going to be on the ditch very soon.
No, no, it's fight for men, men to men, me and you, nobody going to touch the fights just me.
Okay, so let's go back to the crowd and let's fight.
So then we kind of create a circle on the concrete and crowd around me and him.
And who I felt like from the first from the previous fight, he felt like he was missing the stand-up game.
He was missing punch me and the face.
Somebody told him, maybe, oh, he should start fighting him punch you.
Don't grab or him, just so I felt in his stand.
He was looking for to hit me hard, you know.
And I play dummy, I play a kind of little unaware and expect his attack when he came in with a direct, I deflected, grab his body, lift, throw him on the ground
and bang him on the concrete mount and start to punch him on the head, he protected his face.
I put my hands on the top of his head and push his head against the floor, couple of times, and he soft up a little bit.
And then he said, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop.
So I stopped it, stand up, he stood up and said, okay, man, I respect you.
He's all cool for us now.
Said, okay, man, I respect you, you have a potential, you know, you can become a great fighter.
So we shook hands.
And as we start to finish that to terminate our problem,
we'll probably start to fight the Eugenio Tadeel right there, you know. And the confusion stills, and then the police coming.
And one guy, a police guy, very short guy with a cigarette and a mustache, I cannot forget this guy.
He got a gun machine and shoot on the roof.
So the bullets touch the roof and coming down, hit somebody on the leg and stuff.
And I don't know, I want to see who I'm fighting. The guy was very funny.
So in then, hollers fight to a spowspone for next week.
They fought again with the same guy.
But my deal with who was resolved.
How to fight with hollers grow?
Was a draw because we put 10 guys from Lutalivri, 10 guys from Jujitsu and Auditorium, close doors.
And hollers will fight the guy to the end, right?
So in then they start to fight, hollers get punched in the face and lost the tooth.
And then the fight continues, hollers control the guy, he put the guy in a bad position, but not submitting.
And the guy said, okay, I want to quit.
If I was no better, if I was smarter, I said, okay, stop, hollers win.
But I was pissed and was going to see hollers revenge the punch.
Said, okay, hollers, you just stop the fight. If you want to keep fighting, keep beating this guy.
And the guy that for Lutalivri stood up and said, put him, but that's not it.
I push him down like sit down here and shout out.
The guy was acquitted, you know, he was not a tough brave guy.
So he don't want to fight, he said, pull him here.
So why you did that? No, they're going to fight until the end.
So they keep fighting and eventually hollers get tired and both get tired.
So they agreed to stop. We want to stop, okay, stop. So they stopped and was a draw.
I should stop the fight sooner and make hollers victory.
But I was not exactly, for me was not the politics or the was just, you know, the guy just
reserved some points in the face and hollered, missed to get it.
So for me was a missing point where I want to see happen and didn't happen.
Man, hollered. He's he's a, I train with hollered and he helped us out.
I don't know our academy here a lot, man. What a great freaking Jiu Jitsu player.
He is, he's a warrior.
For sure, 100%.
Yeah.
It's kind of kind of cool, you know, you talked a little bit about forgiveness already today.
But you, you say this in the book, looking back today on the fights between Jiu Jitsu and Lutalivri.
I see them very differently. At the time, we were all young men full of aggression and testosterone.
The rivalry between our two martial arts made all of us better fighters.
Steel, sharp, and steel. We should all be grateful for the fact that we always had the ability to fight one another
respectfully. Although there were black eyes, bloody noses and broken teeth, our fights were always one-on-one
and were governed by honor and mutual respect. It was part of the natural competitive process.
It was no accident that Marco Huos, Hugo Duarte, Denison Maia,
Eugene to do my brothers and some of my cousins and I would all go on to fight mixed martial arts professionally in America and Japan.
Definitely a good attitude to have.
Yes.
Competitive, but respectful against these other guys.
It's an honor between fighters. It's not about it's not something we've had to have integrity.
I have respect. That's part of the cold. Something I highly appreciated.
The next chapter in this book is coming to America.
You say there's a little left from me to prove in Brazil at that point.
America was a bigger stage and more opportunity.
And I thought my kids would have a brighter future there.
When I decided to move to the US, Kim and I had been separated for over a year and a half.
I went to see her and told her I would like her to come with me and the kids and give our relationship another chance.
She agreed to my offer. I wanted to make a fresh start.
While I might have been the best fighter in the Gracie family,
Horian was by far the best promoter of Gracie Giu-Gitsu.
He was a born salesman with a great product to sell and nothing helped spread Giu-Giu
to more than the portable video camera.
After Horian and Horian came to America, he began challenging fighters from other styles at videotaping the bouts.
Footage from these and other fights transformed what would have been urban myths into documented truth.
In 1988 Horian put together a video called Gracie in action,
which he advertised in the back of martial arts magazines and sold by mail order.
There you go. That's the beginning.
That's the beginning. That's the beginning right there.
That's when the words started to get out.
Yes.
Because you hear it, but to see it is something totally different.
That's a brilliant marketing move. Hey, come and fight.
Anybody wants to come and fight, come and fight.
We're going to video it and then we're going to show it to the world.
Yes.
That's a brilliant move.
I think so true. He was a genius on that.
I know a Fabio when I trained at Fabios.
He had some of those videos that weren't even in the videos.
And he would show them to us.
Like on a special Friday night, we'd get to watch some real Gracie in action videos.
People's arms get broken because they didn't want to tap.
Exactly.
You go on here.
Students regularly fought in one challenge matches against other fighters and then converted them into students.
Chuck Norris for one.
The actor in American martial arts icon was not only a great supporter, but was also a dedicated student who eventually earned his black belt.
In the 1980s, Norris took a vacation in Rio.
Everywhere he went, he heard about Gracie Gizzi and the exploits of my family.
Norris contacted my dad and arranged to have a private lesson.
After I grappled with him, my dad told Norris to mount him.
And when he did, said, OK, Chuck punch me.
The American hesitated, but my dad was in his 70s by then, but Alio kept insisting.
Finally, Norris drew back his arm to punch, but before he could throw one, the old man to choke them out.
Chuck left Brazil and pressed by the Gracie family and invited us to come to America and hold a seminar for his students.
Fast forward a little bit.
Horyeon and the actor had a disagreement over money.
This is after one of those seminars.
Chuck Norris hired our cousins, the Machado brothers, Carlos Higgin, Hossier,
John Jock and John to teach him.
The Machado's came from a more stable upper middle class background than we did.
Their father was a judge and they did not grow up in Rio.
Not only were they much more reasonable than Horyeon, they were great Gizzi fighters and teachers in their own right.
John Jock Machado is an inspiring person who went on to become one of the greatest Gizzi teachers in America.
Born with only a thumb and part of a pinky on one of his hands,
John Jock learned how to adapt and improvise better than anyone I had ever seen.
His Gizzi was both intensely personal and creative.
So you had the Machado brothers now teaching Chuck Norris.
Yes. But you did, there's a video there's a video you go on against Chuck Norris's.
Isn't there?
Is a little mistake on that video that video in the seminar?
It's a very strong talk, blond guy who was a Chuck Norris good student.
Tough guy.
It was not Chuck at that time.
I was part of Chuck.
I teach him a few times and I sporey film a few times.
So he knows our power but the training was not with him at the time.
When you showed up in America, you didn't even speak English.
No, no.
Where Horyeon or the speaking was?
He came prior to that. He came a few times to America in the 70s and stuff.
So he loved here, the culture and the study of learning and working different jobs and try to make Hollywood
work as an actor as a stuntman.
So he likes to speak the English.
So he learned very quickly and very effectively.
Fast forward a little bit.
Even though Alio wanted Horyeon to lead the Gracie's in America,
it was easier said than done.
There were just too many of us moving in different directions and Horyeon's efforts to control the clan backfired.
After he threatened to sue members of the Gracie family whom he had grown up with on the mats for using their own Gracie last name,
many family members surrendered.
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu got renamed Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu.
I believe that if my brother had allowed everyone to use our family name, our martial art would still be called Gracie Jiu-Jitsu today,
and perhaps it'd be even bigger than it is.
So I wanted to mention that part in the book because I think Echo Charles and I get asked at least ten times a week.
I train Gracie Jiu-Jitsu or Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu.
What's the difference between the two?
Is there a difference between the two?
And I think you summed it up right there pretty well.
I think we start doing Jiu-Jitsu in the protocol where you have to learn self defense.
You don't have, you don't require to use collar belts, no collar belts at that time.
So I student can be ten years a student in a steel white belt and the instructor will be forever a dark blue belt.
So that's what's their reference.
And then in 65 my father started to create the federation because the demand is growing big and a lot of people try to train in.
So he started creating a rules for the federation for the sports rules.
And that's the difference between the collar belts because if you ten years white belt you're going to be better than a six months white belt.
And if it's not fair for them to compete.
So let's make a blue belt for people to create the reference.
Not only for practice but for competition because a new warrior is not going to be a world warrior.
So let's make different rankings.
And that's was the process for callers belts was the evaluation of levels and stuff.
So with this Jiu-Jitsu becomes also a sports Jiu-Jitsu has points, mount position, throw it.
And has the self defense aspect which lead you to a more open mind situation.
If somebody come in with a knife, if two against one, if the guy coming to punch me is no punch is Jiu-Jitsu.
So you start to open your mind to possibilities for unpredictable situations.
Against a knife, against a punch with fight with glove, fight without.
So you start to become a more open mind.
So with the coming to America, after especially after horse, kick ass on the UFC, people start to say, wow, what this kid did with the guise.
So people want to land Jiu-Jitsu, but they also want to compete in Jiu-Jitsu.
In competition becomes bigger than the actual platform for learning Jiu-Jitsu with self defense.
The technical protocols for spending technically the Jiu-Jitsu are not there.
Just Brazilian companies with experience of fighters, to experience how to fight and they come here and display and fight.
So in many great Jiu-Jitsu academies or Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu academies, people teach how to pass a guard, people teach how to choke or to go a foot lock,
but they don't teach gun retention, harassment, control, knife attacks and fighting without gloves, fight, striking.
So because that lack of information, competition Jiu-Jitsu becomes much bigger than the self defense Jiu-Jitsu.
And now Brazilian, anyone can do Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, can fight, can pass guard, can do sweeps.
But not anyone knows the total grace Jiu-Jitsu, which self defense and elaborate techniques for self defense, like the law enforcement programs or situations require more techniques.
So that's basically today, it's a big difference. When people refer to great Jiu-Jitsu, they go more towards the traditional aspect of the art.
And when they talk about Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, they really recognize as a competition.
But they say they are the same with lack of information, you know, in both sides, because sometimes now you see self defense academies, who has no fighting skills.
They are more like self defense. And the other academies, they have fighting skills, but they have zero self defense.
So it's important to bring those together for the perfect academy become a center of knowledge and practice for competition, not only competition or not only self defense.
I don't know if this is positive for an or negative, but I just refer to all of this as Jiu-Jitsu.
Yes, I don't even say Brazilian, I don't say Gracie, but it's just to me, Jiu-Jitsu is all of it.
And that's not just me, I should say.
That's when I talk to everybody in the Jiu-Jitsu community, they just say Jiu-Jitsu.
You used to have to say, well, it's different, this is Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, and this is Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu because you had Japanese Jiu-Jitsu and all these other things. Now, Jiu-Jitsu is Jiu-Jitsu.
What your dad made?
My Federation is Jiu-Jitsu global Federation, no BJJ or no self-democracy, it's a BJJitsu.
Do you think that some of the confusion also comes from, because you have Gracie Academy of Gracie Bah, you have Gracie Humita, and there's so many officially named academies and places that have Gracie in it?
Yes, and we are question is, do you think that that adds to the confusion for people?
So we end up, how Jiu-Jitsu, we end up eventually just calling it Jiu-Jitsu? Do you think that that added to the confusion of the separation of them?
Right now, the situation becomes very, very complex, because the Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu states for tournaments and competition, the Gracie Jiu-Jitsu is more traditional and Jiu-Jitsu embraces everything.
I believe talking about Jiu-Jitsu is the perfect way now to deal with the situation, because it's just Jiu-Jitsu.
And how you practice, we will make the determination if you're going to be MMA Fireer, if you're going to be a police officer, if you're going to be just a practitioner or if you want to compete.
So all this is getting into the Jiu-Jitsu category, which I believe now is from here to the future, becomes Jiu-Jitsu.
Do you find or do you know anything about Gracie Bahles comes off as one that they focus, have heavy competition?
Yes, is that, do you think that's the case?
Because Carlos Gracie Jiu-Jiu-Jiu, in which is the president of the IBJJF, felt like more he feeds the tournaments with his students, better for him as a prophet, better for him as a grow in the politics of Jiu-Jitsu.
So he's emphasizing the competition element and creates a team around that, which is very strong Gracie Bahles.
And other teams like Ali-Anse or Czech-Met or other teams that they all come in that same pattern.
So it's very good for the sport.
It's their options because that's a lot of time in the question, where it's like, oh, I don't know what to choose and why and all this, they just kind of want to start.
But then they hear like, oh, some academy's focus on sport, Jiu-Jitsu, which might not be aligned with my interest.
I feel like for every Jiu-Jitsu practitioner today who is blue belt may be a hundred give up before get the blue belt, at least.
If you put in a perspective with Jiu-Jitsu, put you confronting yourself.
Every time you go to the academy, you have to somehow prove yourself. Show yourself is like a tough enough resilient enough capable to create strategies.
So is a challenge there.
The average Jiu-Jitsu academy, for every ten students who come in to try the Jiu-Jitsu road, eight who will live in less than six months.
Because somehow, you're not only showing the techniques, I show the techniques you love it.
And then you repeat, you love the class.
At the end of the class, say, okay, I can sit, lay down, John, mount.
John, you try to keep your position. I can try to escape. At this point, we unleash the wild.
Yes, the wild, white belts.
Yes, and then that confrontation can lead to a little brute movement, a little violence, or you know sometimes the guys too young, too aggressive.
So you're going to deal with a beast, which you recognize as your worst nightmare.
And you have to basically be comfortable or say, okay, the guy kick my ass today, I'm going to go back there tomorrow, I'm going to fight again.
So you have to have within your capacity to be resilient, to be tough, to be competitive.
So when you have this, no matter the road, the bumpy road ahead of you, you're going to get from Jiu-Jitsu, everything he can give you.
Because you have the balls, you have the courage to go there and put yourself there to learn.
Some days you're going to get hurt, some days you're going to hurt somebody, but that's part of the practice.
And the people, they don't have to get short on that capacity.
So the experience Jiu-Jitsu, they say, oh man, I love Jiu-Jitsu, but it's not for me. I work in computers, I'm artists.
You know, you guys are tough, you can do it for me, I'm very gentle, I am a doctor, so they cannot involve in that practice because, in one point, it's not the practice.
It's what they have in their hearts, you know, is their courage, is their resilience, they're capacity to handle pain, so the elements are lacking for, if you lack of those elements, you basically,
don't find yourself feeling any academy of Jiu-Jitsu because you have to roll.
My idea of the future for Jiu-Jitsu is to create a level in Jiu-Jitsu, where you experiment, the essential sensitivities,
it's a sensory Jiu-Jitsu, you start to breathing, you start to feeling the leverage, you start to feeling the angles, you start to feel invisible power, you start to feel your connection, your reflexes, your defenses,
for the sake of knowledge, for the sake of being proved, you have a chance, but at least for the first year of practice, you should not have an opponent, you should have only training partners.
This way, you're going to have a guy who's going to experiment Jiu-Jitsu, going to love the techniques, going to understand their strategy, and he's going to, he's going to lost weight, he's going to get fit, he's going to get, you know, confident on his knowledge,
but not to prove all the time, not to be able to go and be a fighter or a competitor.
This way, we, we, we, we've the Jiu-Jitsu, we can help, as equity is, you can help anyone, in this, in the full circle,
but if the Jiu-Jitsu is traditional competition, it's drive you to, to, to do, to be an athlete, sometimes you fall short because you don't want to be an athlete.
So, the idea of, give you Jiu-Jitsu something, I never, ever find somebody who don't like Jiu-Jitsu.
Depends how you, being introduced, depends how your practice is.
So, you cannot feel for the good kid, for the tough kid, for the bully, for the, for the shy one, they all love Jiu-Jitsu, if I don't put, for the shy one, the pressure for him to quit.
So, he going to love Jiu-Rou, he going to love Jiu-Move, he going to love Jiu-Move, he going to love Jiu-Move, he going to love Jiu-Move, for the bully, I'm going to give him, not only the knowledge of Jiu-Jitsu, but I'm going to put him to compete for him to start to respect others, and be more malo in the attitude.
So, I can help the bully, I can help the shy one, I can have the, the soft one, the tough, they all can learn, but in a different patterns.
So, what I try to accomplish, and, and, and, and, and, and, still, my time, in my lifetime is, be able to, to create a program who involves anyone in the family, without the, the, the, the idea of, prove yourself, prove you capable, because when you put that kind of challenge, a lot of people not going to enjoy the capacity, the, and the, and the development of their selves.
Well, thinking about it from a, a surfing perspective, because I know Ecos, Ecos planning to start surfing.
If I said, okay, welcome to surfing Ecos, and we took them up to Mavericks in half moon bay with 20 foot day.
Or five, yeah, or five blind, but Mavericks even better though, because it's up whatever 52 degree water, it's freezing cold, it's foggy, it's dark, and there's sharks.
Yeah, you are, and even going to go out, you are, and even going to paddle out. Well, you're not even going to paddle out, so, so that's like going to first day of jiu-jitsu, and there's, you know, a 220 pound 21 year old blue belt that's getting ready to crush the person that just showed up that wants to learn.
Yeah, and some academies, you're going to have a better experience in the first day.
And the other, and the other, a academy is you've been protected for a month or the second month, so you say, okay, now it's time for you to one hour class 45 minutes, okay, now you guys stop, let's keep rolling, you guys can roll, you can, so you protect somebody from rolling for one or two months, but in one point, you have to allow them to roll, right,
and that drop off, you start from that point when you start to understand yourself as having to roll all the time, and that sometimes can be completely depressive for many.
Yes.
So taking that challenge, taking that compromise to compete, and allowing yourself to go there to enjoy yourself, is the key for
to bring more people to the benefits of jiu-jitsu, because I see like jiu-jitsu can help you.
And in a huge spectrum, not only help you on the mat, but outside of the mat, so sometimes you, you, you practice jiu-jitsu, you become calmer, you become better,
better, better, police officer, is just for the practice, you know, so it's a very important element of self-confidence, build self-esteem, and so on.
So it's something we all can do regardless, you're desired to compete or to really fight.
Well, I'm glad it's going where it's going, because it seems to keep growing.
Yeah. For sure. You also, you know, you hear, you mentioned that not only is corny and trying to control all this stuff, but he's also got guys like Hanzo coming in,
who's, you know, a great teacher, you said, you said, Hanzo became a father figure two as younger brothers,
half and high, and into many others. By the time he arrived in America, he was already leading many of the younger graces,
and other friends who lacked direction, Hanzo was a born fighter who, rather than getting scared and dangerous situations, got focused,
Hanzo would go on to be one of the most successful jiu-jitsu teachers in America.
Meanwhile, you had, you say, the West LA karate school rented me their school on Pico Boulevard in an industrial section of Los Angeles.
It was a traditional Japanese karate school complete with raised wood and platform, and oil painting of an old Japanese karate master.
Hot in the summer and cold in the winter, my school had no sign, no parking, no windows, no showers, and it was almost impossible to find.
I can vouch for that. But since I was a family champion in California, it was buzzing about the, about Gracie Jiu-jitsu,
it did not take long for dangerous men from all over the world to find this rundown karate dojo,
tucked away in an alley next to an auto body shop.
Most of my first generation of students were aspiring professional fighters, lifelong martial artists from other styles,
surfers, or professional men of action who use physical force in their daily occupations, soldiers, cops, prison guards, and balancers.
That's what I mean by dangerous. Someone to learn while others just wanted to test their skills against us,
but in the end almost all became dedicated Gracie Jiu-jitsu students.
My people Academy was a neutral environment where you had to leave your preconceptions and prejudices in the locker room.
I didn't allow it onto the mats. And you certainly did not.
This, I thought this was interesting because you say this about coming to America when we first came to the US,
came and I were working our asses off just to get by while life on the mat was always the same,
life off the mat was more difficult because America was so different from Brazil.
Like the United States, Brazil had been a colony, but it was the, it was one where the Europeans at first went primarily to fill their boats with golden emeralds and go home.
In contrast America had been much more idealistic, had a much more idealistic constitution and grew into a more orderly society.
People here did things I'd never seen before. They stood in line, stopped for traffic lights and mostly obeyed the laws.
These may seem like obvious requirements for a workable society, but for me it was a strange new world.
My transition to living in American society was not always so smooth. You got some good stories about some of the things you went through there.
And it's the same for your kids and you say this moving was probably hardest for hoxon, that's your oldest son.
And a few short months he had gone from being the Prince of Rio to being just another skinny Hispanic looking kid in California,
public school who didn't speak English. And his being physically small compared to most of the American kids made him insecure.
All the ESL classes in the world can't help that.
One morning he came out of his room to go to school with football shoulder pads under a shirt and insisted on wearing them to school.
I said no of course, but I saw right into the source of his pain.
In effort to become a leader, hoxon tried to overcompensate with aggression and become extremely reckless in order to prove himself.
He would accept any challenge and fight anyone.
When I sent him to elementary school and torrents he wanted to fight every kid there.
At least once a month the Prince would call me screaming hoxon fought six kids today. He doesn't understand the rules of basketball and won't let the other kids have the ball.
Another time hoxon came home with a backpack full of candy. He told me some bullshit story about how he found it, but I knew he'd stolen it.
Even my punishing him did little to correct his behavior.
I've been a fighter in my entire life, so I understand putting myself at risk.
But hoxon was always putting himself at risk in situations that were not rational or intelligent.
This trait had always been with him. He was very young.
When he was very young hoxon once said to his sister, I'm either going to be rich in prison or dead.
Can you imagine a kid saying that? He was drawn like a magnet to trouble that he could easily could have avoided.
This imbalance concerned me because it took hoxon out of a zone of comfort and put him constantly on the edge.
I was not just watching another aggressive gracy growing up. I was watching someone with an unbalanced mental approach to life.
When Kim tried to reign him in, he became rebellious and defiant toward her. This caused strife between Kim and me because she did not want her kids to be gracy brawlers.
She'd hope that the move to America would put them on a different track, but it was too late.
Hoxon was already on a self-guided mission to be the greatest gracy of his generation.
Reckless yes, but forever a fighter.
Then we get to early 1993.
Hooray and's dream of bringing Valetudo fighting to America to showcase Gigiitsu was about to come true.
He asked me to meet with him and his student Hollywood director John Millius and told me that they had backers for the ultimate fighting championships.
The first U.S. Olympics, America's first Valetudo event.
Finally an opportunity for me to make a name for myself in America.
This was the opportunity that I moved to the United States for and now it was a reality.
When Hooray and told me that he wanted our younger brother Hoist to fight in the first tournament and keep me as a backup in case he lost.
I was disappointed.
So there you go. The first U.S.C. Yes. You must have thought that you were going to be the guy.
I was sure about that. I was sure I was the one who represents the family and then Hooray and come with the news Hoist will do because if he lost you can come up and back and up and stuff.
I felt a little tricky was a good situation for Hooray and keep things under control.
I took as it is and helped Hoist to fight.
I got a backtrack a little bit. You were going at this time you were teaching up at the before you had your studio you were teaching in the Torrance Garage.
I started, I come here, rent a house, he stopped teaching, my garage, under Hordeos students. He sent me a list of students.
I already flew, we scheduled for teaching, private and garage.
Then we left the garage and opened the first academy, Torrance Academy.
I was keeping teaching private lessons, group lessons, helping the whole system of the academy.
There were some seals that came up and trained with you during that time.
There was one of them was an old Vietnam seal, a little guy.
I remember him telling me he was going to try these graced guys.
Another one was a wrestler, a college wrestler, a champion wrestler, an American, a big guy who is a good friend of mine.
Apparently, YouTube used to just go at it.
Yes, definitely.
I have a very, I did respect about the seals, you know, because, and I also met Steve Watkins, which was also a sergeant at the Konorado Bay, I guess, because he was selecting people.
He was trained for the seals teams to make the selection like the hell weak and stuff.
So I know a little bit about the situations they go through to get graduated as seal.
And I also experienced the practice with them, which emphasizes a lot, because when you get tired, you start to get confused, you start to get doubts, you start to make poor decisions.
Seas they get exhausted and they obey exactly what they hear.
So they don't have, they don't blink or they don't ask or they don't have doubts.
They just dare to go, to move forward on the mission.
So if the missions keep holding the knee, they will hold the knee and do the pass out.
So our training with them, sometimes are done at the academy, sometimes are in different places, sometimes are on the carpet.
And they train on the carpet and half hour into the training, they're all bleeding, bleesters and they don't even notice.
And two to three hours rest for an hour, another two to three hours and they go forever.
And if you stop the training, they engage, they fight. And you say, okay, stop.
You jump on the wind. They will stop and jump on the wind. They're too obey what they, so I'm very impressed with their focus, their capacity to,
to completely fear less, completely no doubts, they believe they, they show what they have to.
So it's a very, very special people, you know. And I also hear from my student who are training there.
In some tests, for example, you have to go diving in a 200 yard pool.
And they say, okay, you go to the other corner. If you don't make it, don't put your head up.
So wherever you do, get to the other end or stand at the water.
And 90% of the guys, they try to go for air when they lose their air because no chance for you to make the other side.
So what they want is make you pass out under the water, conscientiously, say, okay, I'm going to die here, but I'm not going to put my head on the water.
And when they pass out, they take you off the survival and that's all cool, but your mindset is there to accept death.
To go into death and not no problem, you don't put your head out.
So this kind of makes one guy out of 1000.
A guy who's able to accomplish so Navy Seals are guys completely prepared to do what they supposed to do.
They have no mind problems, they focus, they is admirable how they can control their own emotions and how they can stand a pressure and be comfortable and do whatever they have to do.
No matter if I'm going that direction, if I'm going my shame, my partner looking backwards,
or another guy my shame looking my back, so if I start shooting here, he cannot even turn the head.
He have to accept, I'm taking care of my side, so the loyalty, the surrendering, the trust, the courage,
is to the high ceiling, it's just after the roof, so much personal qualities.
It's impossible to make a guy like that can be a champion, can be anything because he control his mind in a very special way.
The first guy that I trained you, Jitzi Rith, was a guy named Steve Bailey,
and he was probably a mid-level white belt when I met him, and he was another guy thought he was 100 years old.
He was probably about 40 or something like that, but he had trained with you guys.
Yes, and he was in his house also.
Down here in San Diego.
We showed up on the point that over in Guam, and he came and said, who here wants to learn how to fight?
I was a brand new guy, I was like, hey, I want to learn how to fight, and I also thought to myself, maybe I can teach the old man a little sum,
because I'm pretty bad at myself, I just graduated from steel training, I'm pretty tough.
There's probably five of us that showed up, Jeff Higgs is another one, and we're in Jeff Higgs is a trained with 5% of your
years of soccer.
He lined us up and just tapped us all out, and then tapped us all out again, and that was my introduction to Jitzi.
Then you got hooked.
Totally hooked, totally hooked.
Yeah, I didn't want to skip over those early days, because those are pretty legendary days inside the steel teams, and it's so interesting because nobody knew anything.
I mean, even from that, from what Steve Bailey taught me, I probably got in, I don't know how many skirmishes, like fights, but put tune fights, you know, where you're fighting your friend,
where you're not going to beat the shit out of them, but you're going to definitely figure out what's up, right?
I got into all kinds of those things with my friends, and just from what Steve Bailey taught me, like, hey, this is the...
This is the elbow escape, this is the mount, this is the rear naked choke.
I think I actually just knew the Americana, the rear naked choke, and like the arm lock, maybe what guard was a little bit a little bit amount.
That was like enough, back in those days, man.
You were helping with the world.
Yeah, King of the World.
Yes, in the blindsland, who has one eye's the king, right?
And that's kind of going back to the book, that's kind of how it was for the first UFC.
Oh, yes.
It was hoist fighting against people that had no comprehension of GJ2, really.
Yeah, they coming from different styles, was like, what of styles, you know, kickboxers, sumo wrestlers, and wrestlers.
But the wrestlers, they have no submission, they have no striking, they are not good completely.
Today, you see wrestlers, with great striking skills, great guard defenses, and things.
You see Judo guys, with striking skills, you see striker guys, with Jujitsu skills, and wrestlers.
So it's a mix.
But before people represent their own styles, you know, and then becomes a huge difference.
Yeah.
If you don't know Jujitsu, you're dead on the wood.
Yeah, dead.
I was...
You say here, so this is the first UFC, after hoist beat the boxer without getting hit,
then made Ken Shamrock, the fight who posed the biggest threat to him, tap the less than a minute.
His confidence surfaced in the final hoist face to tall, dead eye, Dutch kickboxer,
names Juraard Gurdou, Gardo, and stuck the same winning formula when the hoist took him down to the ground.
And we just about to choke him, Gardo bit hoist's ear after the referee.
After he freed his ear, hoist choked him, and when he tapped, hoist kept choking,
and it not stopped until the referee prided him off Gordo.
I'll tell you what's interesting. I was watching this fight the other day between
hoists and Ken Shamrock and Ken Shamrock went to do a foot locker heel hook.
No hesitation whatsoever.
Totally saw it.
Desiremed.
Like, did the perfect defense to it, got up on top, got the position.
And so people will be like, oh, you know, foot locks are new, right?
No, it's being around, yeah.
It's been around because hoist defended that like it was nothing.
Yes.
Which is pretty impressive, I think, for 1993.
Um.
After hoist won the tournament in less than five minutes of total fighting time, Americans were
snondered amazed by the power and efficiency of Gracie Jiu-Jitsu overnight.
Hoist Gracie became the biggest name in martial arts and Gracie Jiu-Jitsu exploded in popularity.
Horian thought it was hard to control the Gracie's but soon America would be flooded with non-family members.
Who represented the good, the bad and the ugly of my family's martial art.
During the 1990s, an unusual thing happened to Brazilians when they flew to the US.
Some of their belts magically turned from blue to brown or even worse from purple to black.
And as you just said, in the line to the blind, a one-eyed man is King.
That was the first UFC's were miraculous for martial arts.
Yeah, I think it was like an open eye.
Everybody started to feel something.
They never felt before was like this mix, this integration of fights and fight people fight differently and engage.
And they who went.
So they started to make up different conclusions about what they see on the movies.
Like Bruce Lee is in stuff.
So they can kick fights, 40 people and nothing happened.
And they start to feel like a little different.
The reality is a little different for the strike and then supposed to be.
And they start to feel like how impossible is to not engage and not have this kind of tight.
And once it's tight, it's not easy to separate and risk or mess it.
If the referee is not there to create this space.
So in the value of the grappling becomes, you know, people start to get aware of how dangerous it is.
A grappler is when he's just around your neck.
And they start to create better techniques and it's a different open mind for everybody.
Yeah, it's weird because if you look at a striker and a grappler.
And you don't know anything.
The striker kind of appears to be more dangerous because they're hitting.
And especially in the movies you hit them and they fall down.
And it doesn't.
Whereas a grappler is like grabbing hold of me.
I mean, my wife grabs me.
That can't be a problem, right?
But the difference is major.
Oh, yeah.
So now you start looking to you start looking to fight.
And you're going to end up in Japan.
And you say, unlike the UFC that Japan opened had gloves in 20 minute rounds.
Because it was an eight man tournament.
The winner would have to fight three belts in one night.
I would have to keep an open mind.
I couldn't go in with a strategy or plan because I didn't know who I'd be.
Who'd be fighting me?
My solutions to problems had to be reflexive and responsive.
To me, my fights were solemn celebrations.
And I wanted my family, friends and students to there to witness the culmination of all the training,
all the sacrifice, and all the hard work.
On the morning of the Japan Valley, two to open,
I got to the stadium early and took a long nap in the locker room.
When I woke up, I thank God for life.
And then acknowledge that it was a perfect day to die.
Because of my life's mission was complete.
I was representing my art and my family and the ring.
My opponent would have to knock me out or kill me to win.
For I was never going to tap.
This was not a sport to me.
It was my sacred honor.
And again, I mean, people have to buy the book to read through the details that you give,
what it was like before the fight, what you were going through.
And you detail some of the fights themselves and it's fascinating to hear about them from your perspective.
That's why people have to buy the book.
Fast forward a little bit and free short outside one of the Japan open.
I bowed the crowd on the four sides of the ring, but did not smile.
The samurai did not celebrate victories and neither would I.
Why celebrate a victory.
Your next fight might be your last battles or not parties.
When or lose fights are sacred to me.
So this is an interesting thing that unfolds here.
You say when I got back to LA, I learned of that one of Japan's most famous pro wrestlers.
No buhiko Takata had challenged me.
A few weeks after we returned, my representative in Japan called me to tell me that Takata was telling the press that I had not responded to him because I was afraid to fight.
And then a week later, Takata's protege, Yoshi and Joe,
one of the villains of Japanese pro wrestling had a press conference to announce that he was traveling to Los Angeles to fight me to the death.
When I heard that Andrew had said this, I told him to call me when he got in the town.
I wasn't going to stress out about it.
If Andrew came to fight, then we'd fight.
The Japanese promoters and reporters were always creating dramas and new fanning the flames.
These kind of theatrics were the story of my life by then.
I never lost sleep over the barking dogs.
And then December 7th comes 1994.
What happens?
Yes, I was, I mean, tranquil as always at my house.
And then my instructor called me from the Academy said, Higgson.
He has a couple, he's a couple, he's a couple, he wants to talk to you immediately. I imagine could be the fighter.
He said, okay, I'll be right there.
As I'm going in the car, I was taping my rear hand a little bit to give me a little support for the bones.
And setting up the camera my son will film.
So he was with me in the car.
So when I arrived in my school, which was in the alley, deep alley, first thing I saw was a van full of Japanese photographers.
Camera as in the stuff. So I was getting in, I saw the van open doors with Japanese inside.
So I get through getting to my academy and has this tall guy who is the president of the UFO, the US, the wrestling association in Japan.
Oh Mr. Grace in Nice Meachum.
I like I'm here to talk to you. I said yes.
You said you, I like to invite you for a fight in Japan. I said, man, I told you already, I'm not going to fight in the UFO because you guys are not legit.
You know, no matter if I win or lose in your arena, can be always fixed.
So I have no intention to fight in your arena.
Yeah, but you also said Mr. Grace, you will need to fight for your honor for free.
Said yes, that's what I'm here for. I thought you're going to fight me, but I saw you not here for fight.
Yeah, but the fighter is here, isn't it backyard? Outside, he can come. So okay, so call him.
And as I saw the guy go out to pick up the fighter, I said for the student who was in there said, hey man, you stand the door.
Let the guy come back, let the fighter come in, but don't let the press come in.
So keep the press outside. Okay, so the guy, the guy, the president came in, the angel came in, the door was locked.
And I said, Luis, get on the waver please and give for Mr. Anjou sign, because the waver is always a good secure.
If you get hurt or something, it's a waver, right? Everybody signs waver here.
And then the angel looked the waver with a ugly face and talked with the Japanese with the guy.
I'm not little. And the guy said to me, Mr. Gracie, you mean if you don't sign the waver, you're not going to fight.
Immediately, I felt like, was a tricky question because if I say no, he has to sign, it's okay.
Let's leave then. So he will leave and he will talk wherever he says. Oh, he quit. I was here.
Said no, no, forget the paper. Throw this paper out. You want to fight without the paper. Just you welcome.
Let's fight without the paper. Forget the paper. And then he jumping the ring.
We start to base with each other. How big is how big is the angel?
It's about 200 pounds. My, my height, little stocky solid.
And what do you think when you looked at his eyes? What do you look like?
He was surprised that you accepted this? No, I felt like he was, he was playing a villain in wrestling.
So he has the ugly face, the attitude, he don't flake, he don't blink, he don't show emotions. He's just like ready to go.
You know, I don't know if he was pretending or if he's for sure, but he was ready to go.
And, and the, all these reporters, none of them came in. No, none came in.
I didn't let nobody come in because I don't know what's going to happen.
I don't like somebody which is not my end. Not my friend to, to record everything.
But, but you're sound recorded. Yes, so, was life, was the camera was on.
So, and then the fight starts, I felt like he wants to punch me.
I can feel the difference in distance and the way when you're looking for a position for a punch,
when you grappler, when you strike, when you want to kick.
So, depending on approach, I can see if you're more like a kicker, if you're more like a puncher, if you want to grapple.
And, I felt like he wants to have your hands on my face. You know, he wants to just solid punch.
And, I did the same thing. I played a little dummy when he came with the right.
I deflected grab him under the waist, throw him on the floor, we fall off the mat on this hard wood.
And, he got caught like in a little fancy. So, he got caught in a bad position.
And, I started to punch him punch and he was... Turn back. He turned back to me.
And, I was thinking, if I put him to sleep, he can wake up and tell whatever he want to say.
So, has to be bigger than that, has to be a punishment. His face has to show.
So, I was hitting him backwards on his back and to face me again.
So, I didn't show him. I waited for him to turn face me again. And then I keep punch and I broke his nose, a lot of blood.
And then he turned back again and I put him to sleep. Finally, I could make the tank and make a happen.
So, I put him to sleep and he was passing out facing down on the mat.
So, when he's a result, I tell the guys, okay, now he's the press can come.
So, when the press coming to the place, it's not to picture everything. He was already standing up and the guy tried to cover his face with his...
He's hugging him like, protect his face from the photographers.
And then Kim said, oh, let's get it. So, show his face. So, the guy moved out and the guy's taking pictures of the guy all bloody and...
And they left. Two days later, Angel come back to my school. We forgive to him for some of my helmet.
And said, was dishonor why he did, was a lack of respect, but he's apologizing. He has no problems.
He was very, very straight forward, give me the gift and said he's respect me and left.
And then one week after he stayed in Japan, he was jump into the fight. They jumped me, they...
So, he was like a villain. He talked one face with me, other face in Japan.
And at this point, I have a tape, fortunately. So, my guy coming to here to US, I give the tape to him.
He was able to show the tape to the press in Japan, no make no copies and bring back to me.
So, he showed the press, so my name in Japan was even bigger because everything Angel said was a lie.
And it was proved wrong. And so, that's happening.
And then eventually, I fought one more time in Japan.
And then after I fought Nuburi Kutakada, which was the boss of the Association.
And a big event in Tokyo, down 70,000 people sold out arena was a huge event.
That was against Takara, who was like Yoji's master, right?
Yeah, he was the number one off the roof, the rest. I think Angel was better than Takada as a fighter.
He came in with a better fighting background. But he was the villain. He always never going to be the number one.
You know, Takada has a better, pretty look, he has more like, he's a pure more for the audience.
So, he was the good guy who always win in the end. And the fix fight, you can arrange that with no problems.
Fan.
That video is still not released.
No, only for friends. You're going to be one for sure going to see a copy.
Yeah. I've been ready to see that for a long time.
Meanwhile, there's still life going on outside of fighting. So you got all this stuff going on.
And I pulled this one out. It says, one day, a policeman who knew me called and said,
I have hocks in here. We called him trying to steal from a store.
You need to come down. When I arrived, my son was sitting on the curb.
Hicks and I'm not going to take him in the cops said, but talk to him. He could have gotten in some serious trouble.
When I lectured hocks and on the drive home about how it was wrong to steal and that he didn't need to do it.
In order to prove his worth, he remained silent and stared at his feet.
When we got home, I said, go to the garage. I'm not finished talking to you. He looked me dead in the eyes and groaned.
Dad, can't you just hit me? I'd rather you do that than more talking.
We don't need to talk anymore. Just give me my punishment.
I thought, fuck, what am I going to do to make him fear the consequences of his actions?
That was when I realized I was losing control of my son. Hicks reminded me of my brother holes in that they both possessed psychologists that made me uncomfortable.
But while this worried me, I figured that it was a phase he would pass through as I had.
When I returned to Japan in 1995 a few weeks before the tournament, I went to Yuri, Nakamura's Mountain Cabin.
My pre-freight routine was the same.
Again, this is all stuff that you detail. You've talked about what you're thinking about.
Psychologically, it's so interesting to read the book and get that side of the fight.
That's why people got to get the book.
You had these fights that you talk about. You hurt your neck a little bit.
Then you submit a couple of guys. You end up in that classic fight against Yuki Nakai.
Who had had his eye gouged in his first fight against Gordo.
Yes.
He ended up becoming blind in that eye because of that eye gouging.
He's also, you can kind of a small little guy.
Yes, he's a brave warrior for sure.
Have a lot of respect for the guy.
But you went out and it's clear when you watched that fight,
I remember watching it actually that you and out and basically didn't do any further damage to the guy.
Yes. And you have my friends, my guys and the and the projects and the locker room.
They said, you have to kill him, punch him, start to damage him.
Whatever you have a chance to say, no, man, I'm not going to do anything.
I'm about a technician than him. I'm bigger than him.
I don't have to be hurt him. He's already hurt.
I mean, why are you going to be just mean?
But I'm going to win him with techniques.
So I went to the ring commit to do my thing and prove myself.
I can win without the brutality, without the fear, the aggressiveness, which I don't need for that.
So I was calmly putting him in uncomfortable situations until get the choke.
And this plays a very important role because I always admire Japan.
I always felt like I live my personal bushyde, which is my moral code, my code of warrior.
And I never knew details about Japan, very details.
But I know after the fact I used white, it represents a lot for them because the summer I dressed
white before the armor, you know, in terms of surrounding, it's a beautiful war collar, the white.
I didn't know that. The fact I'm not celebrating fights is the same thing than Samurai.
Samurai, I'm not going to be party because he killed Sambari. Next week, next day can be him.
So the fighting is just a way to a way to a life, which cannot be celebrated at like a party.
So the Japanese also noticed this because in Japan different than US or in different places.
When the fight starts, you don't see nothing. You don't hear anything. The crowd is all quiet.
And when you do a move, they all follow the fight with precision, with details.
They admire not only the fight, but also the personality, how they can relate to you, your attitude, your character.
So when I'm not celebrating you, in a case, defeat, show some respect, show some attitude.
And the fact I was not meant to him, also they noticed. They say, he didn't punch the guy, they supposed to.
So they noticed the fact I was nice. I was serious for battle, but not overpowering, not trying to be a coward and hit him or hurt him in a bad way.
So all those videos that I had to my profile in Japan, because they noticed all those details. And they feel like I was the expression of a new samurai, you know, because I was not bringing back to Japan.
Like I thank you them for, because at the first tournament I said, I like to thank you Japan to bring in Rijitsu to Brazil.
And now I'm bringing back because I feel like it's my way to give back to Japan.
So all this translates to me become some kind of expression of what some what I suppose to be today.
You know, Japan has a big problem with security state of mind, because once they lost the war, the kindness becomes some kind of fear.
So they smile at you, they bow to you, but sometimes they don't like you at all. And they show that kind of code image of respect of,
but eventually they become your enemies. So Japanese lost their soul when they lost the war.
The attitude of samurai's proud and so they lost their swords, they lost their attitude. So they become more like servers and complying with the energy of the rest of the universe.
So my image brought somehow some kind of example of how the modern samurai suppose to act. No swords but attitude the way I speak the way you know, sometimes they prior the fights they have like a day oppressed day.
And then we have 30 different magazines for 20 minutes interviews, always coming in the room and doing quick interviews, some pictures and they live.
And so some guys coming from very important magazines. One of them coming to me and said, Mr. Grace, I just have one question.
How you do to fight a polar bear?
I do not laugh on that question, I don't say anything, I just thought what the question is that.
And I answer to him without losing my my pace, I said, man, I never intend to fight a polar bear. It's not my go.
But if I have to fight one, I'm going to have a nice jacket for the winter, I'm going to have a lot of meat, a bear meat on my freeze and I'm going to have a nice necklace of bears too.
So with that answer, I show him I'm not afraid of the outcome.
I don't blink in front of my, so he's, I don't expect anything like that.
I'm so he they left. So just to see how his mind works, Japanese is very special in terms of, they have a samurai helmet, almost like a scent on the altar.
You know, they have the katanas. Like an example, the god for them comes from like a bushido life of time, have to have honor and dignity integrity.
So when they see me, they see me like as a new samurai, they bring the kids, can you touch touch his face, please can you touch his head.
Things like you don't believe it happens and you say, okay, sure.
So Japanese becomes very much delighted with my, my knowledge of martial arts, my ideas of how to deal with my opponents, how to deal with my peace of mind, emotional control and so on.
So was, was something very interesting, my spirit is in Japan.
Now that's, that's a little bit, correct me if I'm wrong, but in the movie choke, right?
When you're dealing with this, you know you have UK Nikai coming up and you're basically telling,
Hoyler, hey listen, I'm not going to hit him, you know, I'm going to be, I'm going to be as, do his little damage as I can.
And Hoyler's like fuck that.
He's going to be trying to kill you. He's going to be trying to kill you. It's a really good contrast for you.
You're able to overcome that and may take that samurai spirit.
Yes, I mean, Hoyler is a great guy, he's very tough.
And because he was not too big, I've always, life, he was a smaller guy.
So people, they disrespect, Hoyler and a different way, they disrespect me.
Forget you, Gitsu, forget Grace and family, but they look at me, they don't want to problem with me.
They look at Hoyler and say hey man, get out of the, so they have no respect.
So Hoyler is always on his toes, laughing nothing past because he's a warrior.
And he don't want to be disrespected.
So any glimpse of lack of respect he becomes agitated.
So one day we left the academy to serve.
Suf boards on top, traffic in Brazil, traffic jam.
And somehow I cut off a tax driver.
I make him stay in the heat, not a horn.
And then he get on my side.
And he called me, names, you might have had a sad,
and I immediately say hey man, I'm sorry brother.
Sorry bro.
And then Hoyler look at you, he said he's on the guy call you this, this and that.
How you cannot apologize for the guy, why didn't kick his ass?
I said Hoyler, can we imagine the hell this guy living?
Just being on traffic crazy like that?
Can we imagine we going to surf now?
Can we imagine just coming from the school, training, sparring, kicking ass,
training hard?
You think I'm going to fight this guy, he's old, he's fed, he's all a shape just because he
call me a name, I have to beat him up, come on Hoyler, forgive this guy.
Let him go, let his let life beat him.
He's already a poor guy.
And Hoyler told me up today said he's on that message for me,
was hitting me on the heart because nothing can be more.
You know, I never expect this from you.
And once you tell me that, I start to redo my life and see how much people I can
forgive and how much cow might can be if I don't have to prove, I know I can beat the guy,
but I don't have to just prove every time, just because you asked me for.
And that's kind of message, Hoyler never forgot anymore.
So you end up fighting Dakota once and then you fight him again.
Do you beat him?
I think you beat him by armlock both times.
Yeah, both times.
That's why as they say, Hicks and by armlock.
Going back to the book here.
This is 2000.
Earlier that year, Hicks and injured his knee while training.
It was slow to heal and I think he felt his dream of becoming a champion fighter,
slipping away.
While I was in Rio, there were rumors going around that Hicks and was a perspective member of
an LA street gang.
By the time I returned to Los Angeles, Hicks and was getting ready to leave for New York
with his Brazilian girlfriend.
After Hicks and left for the East Coast, I received a message from him that he had made it to New York
and that everything was going well.
When we didn't hear from him for over a month, I wasn't worried because he was still using his
ATM card in New York City.
A month later, December turned into January.
And we still had not heard from him.
Now I was truly worried.
My cousin Henzou's academy was in New York City and some of his students were policemen,
so I asked Henzou if he could try to find my son.
A few days later, a shake and Henzou called and told me that an officer had found a photograph
of an unidentified corpse at the corner's office with a tattoo that read Hicks and Gracie.
Number one dad.
Up to this point, Hicks and had been a missing person.
This was the confirmation that he was gone.
After I hung up the phone, the whole family melted into tears.
Kim seemed to beside me looked hopeless.
I told the kids that Hicks and had moved onto another life and was now with holes.
Now, representing the Gracie family, I had to go to New York City for the physical confirmation.
I knew in my heart that my son was dead.
You talking this section here.
Obviously, I don't think there's anybody that thinks there's anything worse than losing a child.
You talk about what you did, what you thought and how you had to get through this.
Some of the lessons that you had to learn and some of the things that you had to do, you ended up
building like a tree house.
Yes, kind of plata form of the tree.
And that was sort of your escape, but it was an escape, but it ended up sort of being a reconnection.
Definitely, I felt like up to that point, my life was being just a very beautiful ride.
Even with the pressure, even with the doubts, I have always been in charge of my own desires.
I was thinking I was controlling time.
I have a perfect family, kids, loving friends and training.
My life was perfect, and I was thinking I was in charge.
When Hawkson departure, I felt like the floor just get out of my feet.
I was just lost track of, I lose the desire to serve, I lose the desire to train, to teach.
You know, I was a little on social, a little bit.
You know, I was not saving tears, I was crying a lot.
I was, I let myself get down to the hole in a way to embrace a rock and go to the lake and go deep on the bottom of the lake.
And I allowed myself to get deeper enough to know, to feel important.
And also, from that lower point, decide, if I want to kill myself, if I want to drink drugs, give up from, I don't know.
I was just allowed myself to get weak enough and fragile enough to, from that point, see what's happened.
And once I get to that bottom, I decide to make, I wasn't in the, in the, he was silent, my house, I was there just.
And I was climbing some trees and then I saw a beautiful tree with a beautiful ocean view, said, I want to create a platform here to talk with Hawkson.
So for about three weeks, from first light on this, first light to dawn, I was working on this project from designing, to buying the wood, to buying the, the screws and then,
and bringing the electrical to make the holes and stuff and just focus on this, my hands are kind of bleeding so much working.
So I'm making focus on creating that kind of platform. And after that platform, done, took me almost three weeks.
I would make amazing job, put the wood and put the vernish so it was beautiful.
I felt like was a mission accomplished there. I said, now I make my three-boot to you.
So I want to be in peace. And it was a better feeling for me to make this because anytime I miss Hawkson, I was going up there, light up an incense,
made it take a little bit thinking about good things, I have a picture there.
And I spent, maybe a year more and a much better vibration, but not exactly out of the hole.
And one day I was thinking up there, and I remember what my dad said about nothing can be a hundred percent wrong or bad.
Nothing can be a hundred percent right or good. It's always a duo I expect in everything.
And I started thinking, what's going to be that advantage of Hawkson's departure? How, how this can be good in any way?
I started looking for a reason. And then I find something very important, which was up to Hawkson's departure, I was in charge.
If he or anyone else, something, he or he or he could teach me today, dad, can you take me to the beach?
Whatever it is, I can say no, not today, let's go tomorrow. Let's leave this. Not today, I don't feel good.
So I was thinking about being in charge of the time, and in a much more powerful way than I was than I have.
So after his departure, I'm sure tomorrow may never happen.
So based on that difference, I started using my day much more efficiently.
To give you an example, I could be down in the freeway to fight in Japan or to make a big program in Japan.
I'm in the freeway, if my daughter called me, dad, I have to talk to you, she's crying.
I will stop the car in the freeway and talk to her, what's the problem?
Well, this index, so it has solved the result. So I will talk to her and to be able to give my best opinion, my best information, give my time as long as it takes.
After this finish, I turn off the phone.
I will see if I still have time to go to Japan, if I still have time to get the flight to whatever, if not, I will reschedule, I will do because today, I cannot do this for tomorrow.
So I learn effectively how to use my time with precision, with not wasting time, with things are not matter or not give you the value of time, which time is very valuable.
And I start to become more effective on how to use my time, how the purpose of my life, my service, what is really matters for me, and I start to use my day much more worth it.
From a conversation like that today, from a teaching I student, from talking with my family, I will be much more precise, I want to be much more on time, much more.
You know, with no loose ends or no gaps, it's just tight. So by doing that, I re-born. I reinvent myself and a different me, with much more compassion, much more interested for things, much more ways to bring you to others.
I'm still at service, so being happy with that, make me feel like I have to thank you, Hox, for his departure, in order for me to achieve that kind of enlightenment, that kind of depth on my being alive and being at service.
If I was not for that, I could be a lot of loose gaps up today and having my mind in a different matter. So I saw the positiveness of his departure, I have given me the chance to become a better man.
So I'm thankful and away, he taught me that with his departure. So I compensated a little being from that on, I become fully restored my energy levels, my happiness, my desire to live my life and let Hox on.
Being peace in heaven and we know if Halls and waiting for us, dancing and happy.
Yeah, that's, I've had that conversation with myself quite a few times. I've lost some very close people to me, and I've actually had that discussion with many other people, as they lose
lose their loved ones and they will, people have literally asked me, you know, what possibly, what possible good can there be from this?
There's nothing good, this is horrible. And like you did, you have to kind of pull back and look at things from a different perspective and there always is something positive.
There always is a lesson to be learned and there always is the memories that you get to keep.
And obviously this, this had an impact on the rest of your family. You say here, losing Hox and put Kron on the path to martial arts greatness.
On some level, I think Hox and knew that Kron had the natural talent and tools to be even better than he.
Like all my kids, he had trained you to do all of his life, but was never as interested as Hox and now it was his turn to shine.
Even though they were brothers, Hox and Kron were completely different, Hox and was emotional and tense and intent on proving himself a greasy warrior.
Kron was more observant, analytical and calm. He wanted to do the right things and always be at his best.
In one of their last conversations, Hox and told Kron that he was a Gracie and to give 110% and never quit and whatever it was that he chose to do.
After Hox and died, Kron took that to heart and was now on a mission to become the next apex predator in the Gracie food chain.
You say here, the more Kron won, the less attached he became to winning.
After he realized that the outcome of fight does not define you as a person he improved by leaps and bounds.
He trained as hard as humanly possible and when he competed he let the chips fall where they may. When loser draw he would be back in the academy on Monday and train as if the fight had never happened.
When my father died in his sleep in 2009 at the age of 95, I was in Europe with Kron for the European Gejitsu Championship.
We received the news, the day of the tournament and knew that we could not get back to Brazil for the funeral.
Instead we went back to our hotel room and held our own memorial. We cried and shared memories.
The day Ali O'Died Kron represented his grandfather on the mat as Ali O'Woonaflight. He won both of his matches by submission and after he won the European title he kissed the picture of Hox and that always as always and bowed to the giant mural of Ali O'Woonaflight.
He was a beautiful moment for both of us. Ali O'Woonaflight's legacies were now being carried and upheld by a third generation.
That's the family tradition.
Again, in the book you carry on and talk about some of the other things that preceded after that.
I want to get a little bit, go towards the end of the book here.
You've talked about this a little bit today, but I think it's important to reiterate.
My goal today is to create a form of Chijitsu that will empower the entire person both on and off the mat.
If I can never make a nervous person feel more relaxed than they've ever felt before,
I'm changing them from within in a way that a psychiatrist or a pill never can.
Today, conflict comes in many forms and physicality is only one aspect of it.
Conflict follows humans wherever they go and people adopt different strategies to cope with it.
Modern enemies can strike in attacks in email or in a social media post. As the world of instant communication has evolved many negative unintended consequences have evolved with it.
Fifty years ago, a ten-year-old boy winning his room only this sleep because he spent all day outside playing.
Today, if parents aren't careful, their children will spend the entire day alone in their rooms.
We cannot dismiss technology, but why let us turn us into brains with vegetable bodies.
One of the worst side effects of technology is the way it is reduced human direct interaction.
Because people can get almost everything they desire, food, entertainment, friendships, sex, via the screen, they have gotten to the point of being scared of face-to-face interaction.
There are so many wonderful things that are impossible to experience on a screen, jumping into a cold river, making the drop on a big wave, and walking in the rain or just a few.
Even worse, social media provides an arena for cowards to lurk in the cyber shadows and say things that they would never dare say in person.
Mike Tyson put it best when he said that social media has made people quote way too comfortable with disrespecting people and not getting punched in the face for it.
Today, I try to use jujitsu as a tool to teach patients.
Hope, strategy, emotional control, breathing, and many other things, all without conflict and competition.
This allows those who need it most to learn the visible and invisible aspects of the art in ways that could help them in their everyday lives.
I have developed the training routine where in students learn the practice, learn and practice all the movements and techniques of jujitsu.
In a cooperative, instead of competitive environment, I can teach the most critical, invisible aspects of jujitsu, like bass, timing, weight distribution, and connection with little stress.
In this type of class, I can have two beginners blocking punches and doing hip throws.
Your training partner is there to help, not to fight you.
So that's what you were talking about earlier today.
Yes.
I felt like we all in warfare, it's not about being a soldier, it's not about being a fighter.
We are under stress, our lives today are driving in different modes and different aspects.
So what you really need to conquer is happiness.
Your biggest achievement is to focus on how to be happy, how to bring your family to the best scenario, how to bring your job, how to bring your assets, how to bring your...
The way you practice, your physical.
So you want to conquer a lot of things, a lot of things should be conquered, in order for you to be happy.
And in order for you to be happy, I don't believe in luck, I don't believe you, you're going to be happy just by close your eyes.
And if you happy to day, ten years from now, what make you happy today, either evolve or doesn't make no sense it, it's not going to make you happy.
You have a different goals. Every time you just have a different first by a car, then by a house, then get married.
Whatever it is, it's not a step to make you happy or to make you in a good position.
And I see those kind of challenges, those kind of obstacles, as little barrels, which when you focus, when you have the capacity,
the strategic capacity, when you have emotional control, when you have believing in yourself, when you have hope.
So a lot of elements on the water, two bucks has to be used for daily practice, for average jose.
It's not about being a special water and being able to have emotional control.
It's for the weak ones, for the guy who has an email and going to lose his rent or whatever.
So this guy needs emotional control, as they say, my need, the same you need.
So the idea of empower people cannot come in with, I will empower you, but you have to prove you can handle.
Sometimes, the guy don't have, I don't have what it needs, I don't have what it needs to be at fighter.
But he loves to learn details for self defense. He loves to learn details for self emotional control to breathing.
He loves to understand what's the solution for that problem, what's the solution for that.
So based on information, based on practice, he may never fight nobody.
But that's who we incorporate on his behavior, a completely different mindset, a completely different way to breathe and rebounds the distress,
a completely different way for you to feel good about a possible engagement.
So sometimes I train in my students to keep the distance, not in, not in, not in, not in, but keep just stay away from my punch.
So I will try to keep, so based on your space, you can survive, you see people in the UFC surviving in attack, basically moving away.
So if you just move away, you don't have to be a fighter to survive.
So I put you a expert and not getting punch, that's already a big asset in your life, if you ever do, you make sure you know if I'm going to punch in the face, so it's a big win already.
So my purpose with that knowledge is to prepare people to win without a fight, based on different components, mental components, spirit or components and physical components.
Okay, man, you don't have to prove me, you just have to believe you have a chance.
So by giving that chance for I ever Joe, I want to empower the world in a different and a very special way because I will offer them what they need to become more humanized,
to become more sharp, to become better, in control, to become more strategically correct, which makes life different.
If you tell me what's the successful people has in common, all the successful people have few things in common.
They all love what they do. They all capable, to pass obstacles and not give up easy.
They all capable also to become, to make decisions under pressure.
They all able to keep learning, keep progressing, keep taking, so they have open mind about how to strategize the house, the new game coming.
So they not, they not unfamiliar with behaviors and situations, which everybody successful has in common.
So give you those tools, give you the glimpse of what you need to become successful.
If you have to believe in what you do, you have to practice, you have to make sure the strategies correct and so on.
So based on those elements, I cannot transform people from a coward guy to make him a courageous, but I can make a coward guy becomes tall and enough to believe he has a chance.
And that's can transform his decisions and a courageous decisions.
So because we live in a life of pretending, because we live in a life of images and look good and so I like to take you from, you looking from the mirror for you start to feeling.
So when you start to feel yourself in that, you start to understand your breathing, understand your leverage and understand your base.
Completely changed the dynamic you de-handle the word, the way you shake your hand, the way you approach somebody, looking in the eye and things like that.
So that kind of jujitsu can favors anyone in the globe, different than I specialize jujitsu for competition, which favors just the waters, one of favorites, trujitsu.
Yeah, that's, you know, you were talking about what is successful people having common, they get, they can, they have an open mind, they overcon obstacles, they use the right strategies at the right times, they're comfortable in these uncomfortable positions and situations and these are all things that you can learn if you're a good.
Yes, of course, because I met a form for life, you know, the same situation you have to become enough and breathe and put your hand and start working leverage instead brutality.
Same thinking life, you get any any any problems, you have to have the same articulated mindset to just survive or escape or control whatever it is, it's all about making quick changes and start to become focus and the purpose.
You know, I'm going to read one last little section from the book, we're almost at three hours right now, so I'm going to read one little last section from the book.
Go fast when we enjoy and it does. I could sit here all day, you say this, on my best day now, I'm only 5% of what I once was as a fighter. However, my invisible power transcends my physicality and will be part of me until the day I die.
That is why for me, jujitsu is about much more than fighting. It is a tool to teach people about themselves. It is great to see it become so popular and provide lucrative businesses for so many, but this has nothing to do with what I teach.
Of my students 98% trained two or three days a week trying to perfect basic techniques and then testing them on a level playing field. Helping my students try to become better people, not just smashing machines is what motivates me.
Jujitsu is my philosophy, my sacred honor and my family tradition. It is made me strong enough to forgive and confident enough to fight for my beliefs.
Just outstanding.
Jujitsu is life. Yes. Before you go, once again, this book is called Breathe, a life in flow. It is by Hicks and Gracie with Peter McGuire who has actually become a friend of mine.
I know he is a friend of yours and a great guy, a surfer, a jujitsu practitioner, a scholar. So I look forward to working with him some more.
So the way that you are spreading the word now, you have Hicks and Dot Academy. Yes. That is where you do online training. I watch some of the videos. You are going to get people are going to get such good details out of what you are saying.
Sometimes I think it be impossible for someone to explain how you put pressure and how you stabilize Hicks and how you move Hicks. But when you watch those videos, you start to understand you do have the ability to explain what you are doing.
Because Jujitsu is about feeling. It is not about seeing or understanding. You have to feel. And I like to approach Jujitsu and away. I have to make you feel.
When you relax, when you just about angles, just about details, invisible details, who translates and a deep effectiveness. So I don't start to seeking to show me what you have.
I try to make you take you off your elements, relax and put you in a way for you to understand and feel the weak vision. The vision of the weak one into the approach.
Because if you feel like you can fight as a weak person, imagine if you put the muscles you have on.
If I change around and start to use and explore the muscles you have on, you may never go to perceive the death of what I want to show you.
So my father always says, when he is training somebody and he stops up, you two dance, be relaxed, loosen up. If I am not, I cannot fight because he was just seeking to give you the information which goes into your gut feeling.
Wow, I never felt like that difference can change so much in effectiveness.
And by feeling that, you start to feel like it's a different element to be added.
Wherever you have, if you're strong, if you fast, if you compare all these are qualities, personal qualities.
But the death of the knowledge we try to pass to you transcends all this.
So you able to not only explain for a weak person, but to also to, in case somebody with 300 pounds solid muscle,
you have the chance to deal with them in a different natural, comfortable situation.
So it's amazing how much that kind of sensorial feeling can add to your capacity to, to mental capacity to experience,
to all capacity and to also to your physicality.
So that's, that's Hickson Academy. Hickson. Academy is how you get there.
Great stuff on there. You have Hickson Gracie.com is sort of where you can buy, you can read some history stuff,
but you got a store on there. And then on Facebook, your Hickson at Hickson Gracie and on Instagram,
which you have a bunch of cool little clips on Instagram too.
And that's Hickson Gracie, JJ.
Echo, you got anything?
I have many things, but in the spirit of saving sometime, I have one question.
So you know the first UFC one, they took one, Hory and chose Hose.
Did he tell you why he chose Hose rather than you?
Yeah, his answer was, I want to put Hose because in case something happened with him,
we always have a bigger bullet to put it on.
But in reality, he has control over Hose. He did have control over me.
I was already working on Peek-o-Bulevar. I was already my own, you know, have my own school.
So in order for him to have control of not only the fighter in there,
but still with the best brand was better for him to have Hose.
They said that I think might have been like in the documentary,
whatever they were like, he wanted to kind of display you Jitsu with someone who was less physical,
less, you know, bigger whatever that way.
It would display you Jitsu a little bit better because if you went in and you're like this more athletic,
either were like, oh well he's more of an athlete, so it doesn't really highlight the Jitsu part of it.
Yeah, I disagree with that because for me and Hory between me and him are only 10 pounds difference.
So I felt like he was able to even even the first payment for the UFC.
He holds, Hose supposed to get a 50,000 check and I supposed to get 5,000 from Hose's.
I still waiting because he didn't pay Hose. He didn't pay Hose, he didn't pay me.
So he was just put it pure love for us and he was a businessman.
So he knows better what he's doing.
I kind of disagree with that statement, if Hose was smaller and look fragile, Hose was tough to.
I've trained with Hose. He's not small. He's not fragile.
That's for danger.
Yes.
Yeah, thank you. Good to see you.
Hicks and any closing thoughts?
First thank you. You were such a spiring warrior and having, you know, you helping me on the book and
and get me in your podcast is already a blast.
Second, man, I feel like we are in the same business of empowerment.
You know, you, you're bringing your knowledge, your expertise to help people in terms of
understand pressure and understand discomfort, to understand victory and understand, you know, bravery.
And I'm in the same business, which empowers people and give them better chance to handle life, which is not easy those days.
So it's a pleasure to talk to you. It's a pleasure to see the energy which is similar.
And we are in the same mode of supporting the future generations.
You know, with your expertise, with my expertise. So it's just a great day on the office and
I'm happy to say, you know, this book may be helping a lot of people.
And this book is just the idea. My, it's my personal life is not something which has the intention to make you copy or
or be what is in the book.
But creates a, creates a venue for different discussions, creates a venue for different seminars, different speeches and
everything coming from that because in essence, we all need to use more loving our hearts.
We all need to use more techniques to victory.
You know, nothing comes for in luck.
Nothing is just act of God.
I feel like you have to represent yourself in terms of have God been inside you and
bringing the best service to make people get benefits from it. So thank you, true.
Well, thank you. Thanks to your whole family.
I guess especially your uncle and to your father who created this incredible martial art brought it to the world.
And, and like you've been saying, it's not just, it's not just to help people fight better, but actually to live better.
I've just had such a huge impact on my life and I can say without hesitation that my life would not be even close to where it is if it wasn't for you, for your family and for
your jiu-jitsu. So it's an honor to know you.
It's not an atonct you and I will continue to do my best to spread the art that your family and you taught to me.
Thank you, my brother. Thank you, Uncle.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
And with that,
Hicks and Gracie has left the building.
Only after he did spend a few minutes talking about invisible jiu-jitsu and, you know, showing me some stuff.
Yeah.
You were hit. Did you hit record?
You were you?
You videoed a little a little.
A little bit.
Yeah.
It's weird. So he talks about this thing called invisible jiu-jitsu.
We didn't really talk about today,
but
it's a thing and I know it's a thing because, you know, when you're showing a move, like, let's say I'm showing a move with you.
And I'm talking to, so I'm using you as a dummy and I'm talking to the group of students, right?
And I say, well, you can't really see what I'm doing here to the students, but I'm like, echo, do you feel this?
And I, it feels one way and then I go, now feel this and no one can tell anything different, but you go, yeah,
and it feels a lot heavier, it feels a lot like I'm off balance and it feels a lot more stable.
So there's things in jiu-jitsu that are invisible.
And obviously, there's a hardest thing to teach.
Well, Hixon, that sort of Hixon's thing is he's got the things that you cannot see, but they're real.
They're invisible, but they're real.
And like I was trying to explain, he talks about some of those on Hixon dot academy.
He starts to go into details of those things and he can explain it.
Yeah. So, and just when he was explaining it to me and I will say, you know, he's doing it to me and I'm like, well, that is freaking awesome.
Yeah.
Right?
And you just is so dynamic, even if you don't see it, where doing it versus not doing it is night and day when you're in there.
You know, so like even like the thing was that you're essentially controlling your base, right?
You controlling your base versus not controlling your base in that way.
When you go up against somebody and they have to contend with you controlling your base in that way versus not is, but it's going to be a completely different scenario for them.
Different experience.
When I grabbed the single on him and he was like, you know, go ahead and I started like trying to get a little, little uppity with that thing.
Yeah.
And I couldn't move him.
And I was, you know, I'm starting to think, I'm, I'm actually, I mean, we did it for 20 seconds, right?
And in my mind, I was like, I'm working right now.
That's what I was thinking.
I was like, I'm working.
I'm trying to pull this thing and he's not working.
He's just, he's just using invisible digital versus me.
And it's, it's going to wear me out and you can't even see it.
But you before you came in when he started, he, you could see he kind of wanted to show me some stuff.
And he goes, he'll stand here and, you know, start with it.
And he just like stand here and he started doing like some basic steps.
I started doing like some basic self defense with me.
And I was like, okay, you know, cool, you know, I'm thinking, of course, what am I thinking?
I'm arrogant.
I have a big ego, right?
I gotta know this.
And he goes, okay, now do this.
And I was like, okay.
And he's basically, he pushes me and I like, immediately get my base, right?
You know, my, put my foot back again into a fight stance.
And he goes, okay.
Well, that's, okay, right?
And he says, now do this and he teaches me a little invisible digital.
And he now he pushes me again and I don't go anywhere.
Right?
Mm-hmm.
That's the due to.
So awesome to have Hicks and on speaking of due to, we're training due to,
if you're not training due to, obviously, start training due to,
and when you do that, guess what you're going to need.
Supplementing.
Oh, look at you.
Yeah, we did it.
It does.
He did talk about to, uh, actually, I'm not even sure if you talk.
About it on air.
Where, you know, when you, a lot of people start duty too,
and then they, they stop duty, then they stop.
Because in one of the elements, one of them is that they jump into the competitive,
the heart of it, the war.
Yeah, the war.
And not even necessarily voluntarily.
Like they'll get the original.
They'll get to the original.
Oh, yeah, we're sparring right now.
Ghost, just go sparring.
And then they'll come across someone who's, you know,
intense or whatever.
And a lot of times, you just become intense just because of the
unfamiliar nature with what you're doing.
Because you're human being.
Yeah.
It's being escalated on and you're going to escalate back into the ego and all
nine yards.
Oh, yeah.
You know, it's level seven war.
Yeah.
And then just, but just even before he gets to war, just that stress.
It's like some people, they don't want that beef right away.
Yeah.
Even if some people, they don't want that beef.
They just, they want to learn.
They want to learn and, you know, have kind of a stress-free learning kind of experience.
Mm-hmm.
But that's part of that's part of the narrative.
And I think that's a lot about, you know, because I think we kind of go in down for that beef.
You know, I, I mentioned surfing as a comparison.
Um, okay.
If you're going to start surfing and I take you to Mavericks, which is scary rocks,
cold water, sharks, giant waves.
You're not even going to get in the water, bro.
Yeah.
You're literally not going to get in the water.
And I think that's the way a lot of people, unfortunately, view jujitsu.
Yeah.
And they're kind of right.
Because if you go to a lot of schools, guess what's happening day one.
You're in the big water in the deep water and the cold water with sharks.
Yeah.
And you're getting bit just kind of left too.
You know, it's a, so that, that man, I, I, I wish I would think about that a little bit more.
Yeah.
It's definitely something I think about.
All right.
It is good for him to exercise, which is important exercising all capacities.
Very important.
And yes, we do need supplementation from time to time.
I think if it's part of your routine, you're going to be, you're going to be,
you're going to read way more benefits over time.
Short and long term, by the way.
So jockel supplements are jockel fuel.
Let's start with the energy drinks.
And that's what it is.
The god won't discipline go real energy.
Yep.
Had one today.
By the way.
Actually, I've been carrying on everything.
I actually kind of down right now.
Yeah.
Pretty much every day.
Mm-hmm.
You don't have to drink one every day, but that's just, that's just, that's what's written on the screen.
Yeah.
Some new flavors out, watermelon and mango passion fruit.
Mango passion fruit is the best flavor according to some people.
Yeah.
Like, well, factually, I think a pretty sure factually is the best flavor.
So yeah, if you're not, if you didn't know that,
You know, that's what you mean.
You might have something to say about that.
You know, yeah, I would expect that to be the case.
You might have to open a can of well past.
So you're a bad person.
I anticipate that being the case.
Yes.
Then the last, yes, new flavors.
So yes, check those out.
Let me know what you think.
Let me go on.
Did you review so far?
Anyway, yes, healthy energy, drink.
That's a equals thing.
That's a equals flavor, by the way.
Does everybody knows?
Oh, good.
It's not a buy.
It's not an unbiased judgment.
It's his favorite.
His signature flavor, like I said, factual.
Then the last all healthy.
All good.
No bad.
Drink a bunch of them.
And you'll be better off.
Be a better person.
We also got joint warfare.
Look, you're doing your jits through your lifting.
You're running.
Your joints are going to take a little bit of abuse.
Joint warfare, krill oil.
You can just go on to those.
Just get on them.
And don't look back.
And if you have to look back, you'll be looking back at sore joints.
So don't.
And by the way, take the stuff.
So if you want to get on them and say on them, subscribe.
Yeah.
So go to jockelfuel.com order them.
Subscribe to them.
And then shipping's free.
You'll get it for.
You get the stuff shipped to you for free.
You won't have the mental lapse like some people used to in the podcast used to have
where they would forget the order.
Don't let that happen to you.
Discipline powder.
We got vitamin D3 and called war.
Those are also just just sort of staples of life.
Yeah.
Right.
Staples of life.
You're not getting enough D vitamin D.
It's not happening.
Get it.
The proper way.
Yeah.
That's one of the things to where you get in the routine.
You got the subscription all day.
It's just part of the routine.
You don't have to worry about those effects anymore.
That's the big one.
You don't notice it.
But it's better to not notice it than to notice when you don't notice it in a good way.
You're not like damn my knee hurts.
Damn my elbow hurts.
You're just going damn.
I'm looking forward to training today.
Yes.
That's what you're getting.
Yeah.
Screw.
If you need a little extra protein, you get yourself some milk.
I ate two rib-sized steaks last time.
For dinner.
That's good.
And a mom.
I was going to say and it was a triple milk.
So here this is a, this is a, this is a, it's not a normal thing for me.
But I went, I could, you know, start it.
I was on fast.
And what do we call it?
When you, you don't mean to fast incidental fast.
It's a little, what it was.
Yeah.
And it was like man.
I have incidental fast.
It was getting kind of late.
I was like man, I didn't eat anything today.
So I'm just going one time essentially.
And it's going to be big.
I'm going to be big.
Got it.
Big.
So yeah.
Two rib-sized.
Brown rice.
I'll bigger the rib-sized one.
Okay.
So there's a big.
Yeah.
They're not those thick things.
But I know what a regular thing is.
They say regular I have an image.
Yes.
We're talking probably 14 to 16 ounces.
You know, probably about a pound.
Yep.
That's like a regular rib.
It is very normal person.
Yes.
Because my rib eyes are those thick ones.
Yeah.
The thick ones are good too.
But Brad, you think I'm going to eat two of those.
I don't know.
You know, I'd have to be pretty hungry.
But then the triple, what's a triple milk?
You said it was a triple milk.
Okay.
Two big.
In fact, it was so big the milk was so big.
My stomach was getting way too big.
But it was tasting good.
So I pound it.
But I didn't get it.
Where did you mess it?
Mix it with regular milk.
Half milk.
Half almond milk.
So that's the thing.
With an annum thing.
And I got to say, you know, people like think I'm a close-minded about, you know, nutrition
or I'm close-minded about my habits.
Because I am a very habitual person.
But these things that have recently been introduced to me.
Coconut milk.
Like almond milk.
Oh milk.
Like I've been trying these other milk.
And what's nice about them is if you get that little lactose, I'm not lactose intolerant
like strictly.
But if I drink a whole bunch of milk, let's face it.
We're not feeling great.
Might have some effects.
Yeah.
So you mix up the milk with the almond milk or coconut milk or whatever kind of other milk
that's out there.
You're just, you don't know.
You don't really know the difference.
It still just tastes like a freaking dream.
Yes.
So the almond milk, obviously there's a plethora of different types of almond milk.
Sweet, but it's not like it did.
Like bark milk.
The way it was.
The particular one I did was the unsweetened.
It's super like milk to me.
Does it doesn't taste sweet at all?
Milk is not sweet.
Yeah.
But apparently it is because unsweetened almond milk is like, whoa, like you can taste the unsweetened.
I love it.
So I did a half and a half.
And but with the milk and the banana, boom.
You're good.
Oh yeah.
It was essentially a dessert.
And additional product.
There was like a thousand.
You're so much pretty.
Yeah.
You just feel so good.
At the brown rice though.
Why can't you train today?
I have some prior engagements.
Okay.
But why can't you train today?
Well, maybe if it was later, like it maybe like five.
Okay.
Why can't you train today?
It was bumped out of the surface.
All right.
So it realized we train, I mean, I don't know if you thought it was hard.
But you know, okay, you know, when you get into like a routine,
working out training,
you don't feel domes as much.
You don't feel like everyone's in a while.
Like I'll have one with Greg.
Yeah.
And yesterday was was actually kind of intense one with you.
Mm-hmm.
Where the next day, like today when I woke up,
I was like,
You had four body downs.
Four body.
Like a like I got hit by a truck.
Like, you didn't roll over.
You did.
You know what it was?
It was that choke that I was trying to defend.
That you didn't have sunk in, but you had it tight.
You know, that kind of stuff.
So you feel like, oh, I can defend,
but I'm gonna take some heavies on this.
And I'm like defending trying to build up.
And then at the end, it's like, all right, it did.
You know what's bad, but your choke, I'm just gonna say.
So your choke sinks in and it's tight.
But you know how most people when they sink in a submission,
that's not all the way sunk in.
And then you feel like pushing hard.
You feel after a few seconds,
you feel them let up a little bit for some kind of adjustment.
You know,
or maybe because you know, you can't keep that intensity on the application for that long.
You know, so you feel loosening up a little bit and maybe adjust and then go for it again.
I want to, right here's just gets tighter and harder.
Like your choke doesn't even get tired.
And like, oh my god, I'm resisting or he's this in then.
Yeah, for whatever, finally I get choked.
So I tap and then like, I'm paying this price for it even after I tap.
And then I think you choke me again too.
Anyway, so I'm like, all right, cool.
And after you train your all loose and you know, warm and stuff,
but next day else, which is today, by the way, ready?
Okay, but we got a train.
All right, well, I'm going to get a train.
All right, so any of this stuff, you can get it at the vitamin shop.
You can get it.
You can get the drinks at walla.
Wow, wow, it's fully in full support.
Go hit your walla.
Get yourself a hogey.
A shorty from walla.
And a discipline go.
Yeah, and a discipline go.
And also, jockelfield.com, like I said, subscribe.
We know shipping can be a pain, but if you subscribe,
but you don't even have to worry about it, it's just coming for free.
Yep, so that's that.
Also, we were talking about jiu-jitsu today,
and also at origin.usad.com, get yourself a jiu-jitsu geek.
Just go get one.
You know, Hicksman was talking about like, oh, we were had geese before we had diapers.
Go look at pictures of like the Gracie family when they're all we're just wearing geese.
It's true.
It's funny, because I joke about like, hey, you can't just wear a gear around.
Apparently, if it's 19, whatever, 19, 65, and you're in the Gracie family, you are wearing a geese.
You are wearing a geese.
Well, we're in it to the beach.
We're in it to the market.
We're in it, whatever.
Yeah, that's that's when like all those things are fired up for that.
Like I'm thinking about wearing a geese more often in more regular situations.
Just representing jiu-jitsu.
It's crazy.
The whole comprehensive psychological approach that they had,
because they, every once in a while, you'll hear about like,
Quiler would tell us about it where he'd be like, yeah, if you,
you know, if you lose your first tournament, you get 20 bucks.
If you win, you only get 10 kind of a thing and say,
Oh, that's something weird psychology, not weird, but that's something like intense psychology.
Like they're thinking, it's not like they're just throwing people in,
do jiu-jitsu because you have to eat a name's crazy.
It's like there's this whole kind of thing.
So everyone's on all those details, whatever, that's it's real interesting.
That's interesting.
They were so used to it.
It's like, you just wear the geese.
I'm kind of pissed off at myself that my kids just want to wear a geese school
when they were seven years old.
What are you doing?
Jiu-jitsu.
Yeah.
Back away.
So if you want any of this jiu-jitsu stuff,
or if you want to get jeans, if you decide,
maybe you're not ready to wear a geese all the time,
like I'm deciding right now.
If you're not ready for that cool, it's cool.
Get yourself some jeans, get yourself some boots, get yourself some t-shirts,
origin, USA.com.
And the USA part isn't just like, oh, it's origin,
USA, we're calling it USA.
No, it's because of Made in America,
which by the way is not no small feet.
We are making everything in America.
Even the clay, even the clay analogy.
The clay is made.
Yeah, everything.
The materials are made.
The copper rivets on your jeans are made in America.
The coppers from America.
The cotton is from America.
Some people call it cotton.
Yeah.
Of course.
So, it's called forgingusa.com.
Go check it out.
Go support America and support GJ2.
You're self-ported.
We're also a rich,
way.
Also, jacos store.
It's called jacos store.
This way you can get your t-shirts,
who these hats with disabilities,
freedom, good.
The attitude of good.
You saw it in there, right?
Yeah, 100%.
Oh yeah.
So, yeah.
In the toughest of situations.
Oh yeah.
One of them men.
Yeah.
To the end degree.
You can get, again, a pair of all this stuff.
Got some shorts on there.
Good stuff on there.
We also have a subscription scenario called
the shirt locker, different designs.
More artistic sometimes.
More clever sometimes.
I started to explain their cool.
Go in there.
Check it out.
Jacos store.com if you like something.
You can subscribe to this podcast.
If you haven't yet.
I don't even know if you should.
Maybe you should just back away from iTunes.
And Spotify.
Do you know that there's a name for people who watch videos or listen to podcasts,
but don't subscribe.
What's a name?
Ninja watchers.
They just stealthily.
Yeah.
They'll come, they'll come, whatever.
I don't know if it's a good thing about things.
I mean, it's good if you're not looking to support.
We also could call them free loaders.
Free loaders.
Yeah.
Free.
So I don't know that might not be as accurate.
It's not asking much.
Just to click that subscribe.
It's not like you're like, hey, you know,
give me your first born child.
I'm going to be honest with you though.
Straight up.
I don't even know what subscribing.
It does for like, for the podcast.
I know what it does for the person subscribing.
You just have to try doing it.
It's on your feed.
You get the thing.
That's all.
It's all benefits.
For sure.
If you're done for.
Why do you care if someone subscribe?
I'll tell you exactly why I care.
Do you want to want to want to want to want to want to.
Why?
Listen, we make this podcast to help people out.
If someone subscribe to the podcast.
If you, whoever's listening right now,
subscribe to the podcast, that makes the podcast when it gets downloaded.
When you download it, when you listen to it,
it makes the podcast more popular.
The more popular the podcast is the higher it goes in the ranking of podcast.
The more it gets promoted inside the various podcast platforms.
The more it gets promoted inside the podcast platforms.
Someone that doesn't know about the podcast goes,
I wonder what that's about.
Seems popular.
A lot of people listen to it.
They click on it.
They listen to it.
Next thing you know, they're learning about leadership.
They're learning about how to overcome loss.
They're learning about what to do in a breakup.
They're learning about jujitsu.
So you're not just helping yourself.
You're not, I mean, look, like you said,
does it benefit from the podcast?
You're not helping yourself.
You're not, I mean, look, like you said,
does it benefit us directly?
Oh, yeah.
I'd echo doesn't send me a text going,
hey, you know,
our podcast is ranked number three.
You're not doing that.
But if it broadens the people that get to hear this information,
that's why it's important.
Yeah, I guess I didn't really thought of the whole chain.
And that's assuming that it does in fact get you higher in the ranking.
Oh, it definitely does.
Definitely does.
Yeah, because I mean, the rankings are based on download.
So if you subscribe to it, it gets downloaded.
If you and two of your friends, that's three.
That's true.
But can't you download it without subscribing, though?
And you know what else is weird?
I forgot to ask, kicks in this.
Let's face it.
The Gracies could have just held onto all their knowledge, right?
Yeah.
Right?
And just be dominating the jitsu,
the MMA world right now,
not open any schools.
Just keep it hidden, keep it secret.
Sure.
And other people would try and figure it out.
But it's different, right?
It's different.
It's, but the right thing to do,
and their art has progressed more because they opened it up and gave it to the world.
That's all we're trying to do, too.
So you're just asking to subscribe is to receive, essentially.
No, no, no, to subscribe is to help.
It's to help other people learn.
It's to help this mentality.
You know, you can't go to get a job at some new office.
There's people that are like, hey, nice to meet you.
There egos and check.
They're looking to cover and move and they're,
you're able to function better and the world gets,
becomes a better place.
So you guys, um, in the teams,
what it loads to the expression, pass the words,
spread the word, pass the word, pass the word,
spread the word, spread the word, spread the word, spread the word,
spread the word, spread the word, spread the word, spread the word, spread the word, spread the word.
Right?
Yep.
Pass the word, so we're all on the same page.
We're all doing it.
You're making the whole place a better place.
So, so like I was saying,
subscribe.
I'm going to ask you guys, that I do with my brother,
Darrell Cooper DC, who also has a podcast called
Marker Made.
Grounded podcast, which is about you,
just so I guess we just kind of did it.
Did you just do podcast in a way?
Uh, warrior kid podcast as well for the kids out there.
We also have a jockel underground.com.
Where we have a little alternative podcast.
We do some, some expanded topics.
We go into some detail.
We do a lot of Q&A that people can ask questions directly.
If you're a member of jockel underground.com,
you got to pay to be a member.
Well, actually, technically, you don't have to pay.
Look, we request you pay $18 a month to be a part of that subscription.
But if you can't afford it, it's cool.
We still want you to be in the game.
We still want you to have this knowledge.
You email assistance at jockel underground.com.
And the reason we have that is because
Look, these tech platforms are very large and very powerful.
And they actually have the power to insert advertisements
into our podcast.
They have the ability to edit or remove or whatever.
Banos.
I'm not going to mention the podcast name,
but it's one that's kind of internet work.
I know, here's the thing.
In fact, I maybe should even say this,
but I don't know.
Thing is, you was randomly removed.
It's just removed.
Yeah.
From only one specific platform to it, by the way.
And I noticed the title of it.
I was like, oh, that could be a controversial title.
Yeah.
So we don't want to have any of these platforms to have
Final say on what we're doing.
So we made the jockel underground.com.
And if you want to help us out with that alternative platform.
If we ever have to leave these platforms,
we have a place to land.
And we appreciate the support that we have a YouTube channel
where I am the assistant director to many of the superior.
Amazing videos.
That's real fun.
Let's be catching on.
But you're the assistant director.
What's funny about it?
It's just, you know.
What's funny about it is what's really funny about it is that we joke about it.
But what's really funny is you know what I'm funny.
Kind of true.
Because you know occasionally, I get shot.
You got shot.
I do the shot.
So go to go to YouTube and subscribe to
Jockel podcast also origin.
Origin USA has a podcast channel.
But if you want to know what's going on up in Maine,
yeah.
You check that one.
That's a good one to stay to stay like kind of in the game as far as I
like, hey, this is what like legitimate almost in a way
redefined American manufacturing.
Yeah.
That's a whatever.
It is a unique one because of like the culture of all them and
peed and like all them.
Yeah, it's cool to know what's going on too, right?
Like you order those boots.
You can see who made.
Yeah, you can see the thing about that.
You go to a regular store and buy a pair of jeans.
You have no idea what you know starving person in a
sweatshop in China.
You know, you don't know, right?
You know that they got paid 13 cents for their weeks worth of
work like slave labor.
Yeah.
Or you can actually go to origin USA and see the people that are
making your stuff and see what they're doing and getting the game.
It's freaking legit.
Maine ties up there doing it.
Yeah, doing great work up there.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Also psychological warfare.
If you're having moments of weakness like I used to.
None anymore.
Maybe I do sometimes, but if you have those, you know, you
want to skip the workout.
You have a workout planned and then all of a sudden you're like,
hey, man, maybe today would be best to rest.
But you know that deep down that that's just you've been lazy or
not in the mood and being weaker.
Whatever psychological warfare.
He got jockel helping you through those moments.
I'm going to be a problem with tracks.
I get that wherever you purchase MP3s.
So they don't.
And if you want some cool stuff to hang on your wall to keep you on the path,
go to flipsidecampus.com, Dakota Meyer.
He has that company and they're making cool graphical things images to put on your wall,
which is cool books.
Got a bunch of books.
Hey, this book right here.
Breathe a life in flow by Hicks and Grace.
You just heard from them.
There's so much more information that I didn't cover.
I wrote the forward.
What an honor.
A little bit of the forward.
There's quite a bit more to the forward.
Explain some of these things about your juts.
What impact it had on me.
So get the book breathe by Hicks and Gracey and Peter McWire.
Another awesome guy that helped help them write that book.
Final spin.
Let's face it.
We don't know what's going to happen.
We're final spin.
People are unsure what final spin even is.
Is it a book?
Is it a novel?
Is it a poem?
Is it a story?
Is it a manuscript?
We don't know what it is.
Literature?
There's no one that's going to try and pin it down.
I think it will create its own form of literature.
You're going to want that first edition.
So pre-order that right now.
The publishers are like, well, you know.
My publisher hears this and they talk to me about it.
So I need to do it more.
Leadership strategy and tactics field manual to code the evaluation protocol discipline,
because freedom field manual way the warrior kid 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Mike in the dragons about face by hack worth extreme ownership and the dichotomy and
leaders of these are all the books I've written thus far.
Check them out.
I have a leadership consultant consulting company where we solve problems through leadership.
Go to echelomfront.com.
If you want to get some of that.
We have extreme ownership academy.
It's an online leadership training academy.
I'm there two, three times a week answering your questions.
So if you want to talk to me, you want to give me a scenario that you're in that you need help in.
Go to extremeownership.com, join the academy.
We also have some live events.
The next one is the master in Phoenix, August 17th and 18th coming up.
Then it's going to be Las Vegas, October 28th and 29th.
Check out extremeownership.com.
No, actually go to echelomfront.com and go to events for that.
These things have sold out in the past.
These are going to sell out to.
So check them out.
And if you want to help service members active and retired, their families, gold star families.
Check out Mark Lee's mom.
Mom Lee.
She's got a charity organization.
And if you want to donate or you want to get involved, go to America's Mighty Warriors.org.
And if you want to get engaged with Hicks and Gracie, once again, Hicks and Dot Academy.
Is where you can learn his invisible jiu-jitsu.
Hicks and Gracie.com.
He's got a bunch of information on there as well.
And he's on Facebook at Hicks and Gracie.
And he's on Instagram at Hicks and Gracie J.J.
And by the way, Hicks and it's spelled with an R in case you're wondering, that's the Portuguese pronunciation.
And if you happen to want more of my prolonged pontification or you need more of Echos,
obtuse or rating.
It's not obtuse.
If you want more of Echos, obtuse or rating, you can
find us on the other web's on Twitter, on Instagram, which echoingly calls the
Grim.
And on that Facebook.
Hicks and Gracie.
And Gracie, for giving us all the gift of jiu-jitsu.
And also, thanks to the Gracie family.
I didn't mention this, but they've spent a lot of time teaching our military, the art of jiu-jitsu.
Many of the Gracies have worked with the military over the years to improve our operational capability.
It is much appreciated and to those military folks that have taken those skills and
use them to protect us overseas.
We thank you for that.
And the Gracie family has also helped much of law enforcement.
And we hope that law enforcement further embraces jiu-jitsu as a highly beneficial thing that will help
them in every aspect of what they do.
So, thanks to the Gracie family for that.
And also, thanks to our police law enforcement, firefighters, paramedics, EMTs, dispatchers,
correctional officers, boarded patrol secret service, and all first responders who put those skills
to work to protect us here on the home front.
And now everyone else out there.
Please.
No matter who you are, no matter what you do, no matter what you think, no matter where you're
from or where you are, do me and yourself a favor.
And go train jiu-jitsu.
They will make you healthier, smarter, stronger, more confident, more aware.
I mean, I could go on, but suffice to say, it will make you a better person so go out there
and get after it.
And until next time, this is echo and jockel.
Out.